Title: A.Q. Khan and Onward Proliferation from Pakistan (Chapter 3)
Author: IISS (International Institute for Strategic Studies), edited by Mark Fitzpatrick
Source: Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the Rise of Proliferation Networks
Date: 2007
URL: https://bpb-us-e2.wpmucdn.com/sites.middlebury.edu/dist/9/5764/files/2009/02/IISS-from-web.pdf
Type: IISS Strategic Dossier chapter (full text, extracted from PDF hosted at Middlebury)

Description: Chapter 3 of the authoritative IISS dossier on the Khan proliferation network.
Examines Khans nuclear exports to Iran, Iraq, North Korea, and Libya in chronological order.
Covers the transition from Pakistans import network to Khans independent export operation,
the role of Pakistani government authorities, and unanswered questions about additional customers.

--- FULL TEXT BELOW ---

Chapter three
A.Q. KHAN AND ONWARD
PROLIFERATION FROM
PAKISTAN
This chapter examines the known cases of nuclear
exports undertaken by the A.Q. Khan network (and,
in the case of North Korea, by Khan himself, independent of his foreign associates) and is intended
to enable a fuller understanding of the involvement
and responsibilities of each of the various actors at
work: Khan, his foreign business partners and the
relevant Pakistani authorities, military and civilian.
A!er describing the conditions that allowed Khan
to make the transition from importing for Pakistan’s
national nuclear programme to exporting to other
states through his own independent network, the
chapter examines, in chronological order, the interactions between Khan and Iran, Iraq, North Korea
and Libya, and notes the unanswered questions
about what Khan sold and to whom else he might
have oﬀered his nuclear wares.

Transition from imports to exports
From the outset, Pakistani government authorities
provided A.Q. Khan with a remarkable degree of
power and autonomy, partly because he demanded
it, partly because of the very sensitive nature of his
work, and partly because he was able to achieve
tangible results faster than the Pakistani Atomic
Energy Commission (PAEC), the rival scientific
laboratory to Khan Research Laboratories (KRL).
At first, President Zulfiqar Ali Bhu#o directed the
nuclear weapons programme personally, without
much bureaucratic involvement. A small organisation was set up to troubleshoot security, finances
and other issues that A.Q. Khan or PAEC Chairman
Munir Ahmad Khan raised; its job was not to regulate the activities of either KRL or PAEC.
As A.Q. Khan began to make real progress with
his centrifuge project at Kahuta, Bhu#o’s successor,
General Zia ul-Haq, who did not particularly
care for the PAEC chairman, provided A.Q. Khan
with further sweeping responsibilities. Because of

an IISS strategic dossier

mounting concerns about US and other foreign intelligence penetration, Zia ordered increased secrecy
and compartmentalisation of the nuclear weapons
programme, thus allowing Khan to operate much
more independently.
An unhealthy rivalry with PAEC propelled Khan
towards even greater secrecy and opaque business
practices. The Pakistani government encouraged
the strategic laboratories’ rivalry and was only
interested in tangible results for the weapons
programme. The fact that Khan operated beyond
the remit of the vaguely stated laboratory guidelines surprised nobody, as every oﬃcial involved
in the nuclear programme recognised that improvisation of various sorts was required to circumvent
foreign export controls and other international nonproliferation constraints. While PAEC was accountable to governmental authorities, KRL was not, and
it expanded its responsibilities beyond its mandate
into designing bombs, developing trigger mechanisms, reducing uranium gas into metal and working
on design assembly itself. It is unclear whether
this initiative had been oﬃcially sanctioned by the
authorities or was a unilateral decision on Khan’s
part. Apparently, Zia had privately authorised the
more results-oriented A.Q. Khan to continue activities that were parallel to programmes that PAEC was
conducting. In turn, Zia encouraged M.A. Khan to
report on A.Q. Khan. The bi#er rivalry between the
two organisations handicapped the safeguarding of
Pakistan’s nuclear secrets.
The PAEC–KRL rivalry was played out in three
significant ways. The first was a public-relations
ba#le waged by each organisation to win popularity by defaming the other. KRL employed at least
%& journalists in this vein, with PAEC following
suit, but to a far lesser extent. The second aspect
was fierce bureaucratic infighting. More generally,
this rivalry stimulated Khan to operate beyond

65

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

the vague governmental guidelines and to undertake his procurement and production activities
in extreme secrecy – partly so that PAEC oﬃcials
could not discover what he was up to. PAEC’s
failure to procure a plutonium reprocessing facility
was partially blamed on its hesitant leadership and
outmoded bureaucracy. In contrast, A.Q. Khan’s
success in achieving his objectives confirmed the
value of being freed from bureaucratic constraints.
During the '()&s, Pakistan found itself immersed
in clandestine activity. The covert war against the
Soviets in Afghanistan made Pakistan a hub of
covert supplies and transfers. This environment
enabled Pakistan to bring in nuclear-related shipments under the guise of other clandestine weapons
and equipment bound for Afghanistan’s ‘jihad’.
Pakistani import- and export-control organisations
(customs, immigration, etc.) became more ineﬃcient and corrupt.
By the mid-'()&s, A.Q. Khan had begun work on
a second-generation centrifuge design, designated
the P-% (like the P-', based on a Urenco design – see
pages '), %&), which had rotors made of maraging
steel (an iron alloy that has superior strength without
losing malleability), enabling it to spin at twice the
speed of P-' centrifuges and to enrich uranium more
than twice as eﬃciently. As the acquisition priorities of KRL gradually shi!ed to materials required
for the advanced P-% designs, Khan was le! with
an surplus inventory of P-' centrifuges and related
components. This gave him and his foreign-based
partners the opportunity for a more profitable business model by exploring export markets. In two
notable instances, however – those of both Iran
and Libya – it may have been a case of interested
customers first reaching out to the network, rather
than the other way around, although accounts diﬀer
on this and many other points. To meet the growing
demand for its wares, the network established
a nuclear supply line with a life of its own. Thus,
instead of reducing the supply line a!er Pakistan
had acquired the essential ingredients to produce
weapons-grade material, the network redoubled its
acquisition eﬀorts to go a!er more advanced technologies (for the P-% centrifuges), as well as greater
quantities of materials which were not needed by
Pakistan but could be resold to customers elsewhere
in the market for P-' centrifuges.
Khan’s nuclear acquisition activities were
largely unsupervised by Pakistani governmental
authorities and his orders of many more components than Pakistan’s own enrichment programme

66

required apparently went undetected.1 He had
access to autonomous import and export privileges
that no other organisation in the country possessed.
It is unclear whether the excessive orders placed by
Khan all arrived in Pakistan or went to Dubai for
storage or dispatch to their final destination. Having
expanded into other areas related to the manufacture
of nuclear weapons and their associated delivery
systems, Khan now had reason to seek more foreign
shipments and to charter more aircra! to transport
the goods. No one apart from the president had
authority to question the contents or justification of
Khan’s imports or exports. This was owing to Zia’s
decision to give Khan a very long leash as long as
he delivered the goods for Pakistan’s own bomb
programme – which he always did.
Most of Khan’s onward proliferation deals were
struck during a particular era of Pakistan’s troubled
political life. Between August '()) (when Zia died)
and October '((( (when Pervez Musharraf took
over), the structure of power in the country was
diﬀuse and complex, with three diﬀerent poles: the
presidency, the army and the prime minister. The
civilian leaders had li#le involvement in nuclear
ma#ers, policymaking was personalised and
democratic institutions were weak. For over two
decades, from '(*+ onwards, Khan’s foreign travels
were not checked and his itinerary was a national
secret, especially a!er the trial in the Netherlands,
for which he was sentenced in absentia (see page
')). The Directorate of Inter-Services Intelligence
(ISI) was the only other organisation that escaped
governmental accountability, due to the covert
nature of its role in the war in Afghanistan and in
other intelligence and counter-intelligence operations.
The fact that Khan was privy to the highest
national secrets meant that his activities could not
be easily questioned. His security apparatus was
not designed to monitor him, but rather to protect
him and his organisation from external spies
and anything that might compromise his foreign
procurement for Pakistan’s nuclear programme.2
All KRL security personnel reported to him, and
those military oﬃcers posted to him or other strategic organisations were appointed by the army
a!er screening. Most were either retired or on the
verge of retiring from military service, and a posting
to guard the most coveted national organisation
became a ma#er of pride. Security personnel were
assured that there would be financial benefits and
privileges so long as Khan considered them to be

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

indispensable to the security and advancement of
the programme.
The network of brokers, financiers and front
companies that Khan created to supply Pakistan’s
enrichment programme was also available to him
for the new export opportunity that had become
apparent. Khan’s network initially consisted of a
loosely connected set of intermediaries, which gradually evolved into a business enterprise. Contacts
with Iran in '()* represented the first known case
of foreign associates working on Khan’s behalf for
purposes other than importing goods and technology for Pakistan.

Iran
The Khan network’s first known involvement in
onward proliferation started with a discreet overture
from Iran during the Zia regime in the mid-'()&s.
According to oﬃcials who were close to Zia, Iran
approached the Pakistani government through
oﬃcial channels but did not receive the fuel-cycle
technology it was seeking. Although the Pakistani
press reported in November '()+ that Zia had
given a green light to an Iranian request for nuclear
cooperation, according to his aides he directed his
nuclear programme managers just to ‘play around’
with the Iranians ‘but not to yield anything substantial at any cost’.3 Zia calculated that the initiation of
civil nuclear cooperation with Iran was a prudent
way to satisfy the political imperative of maintaining good relations with Tehran while at the
same time not compromising Pakistan’s own covert
nuclear weapons eﬀort. He did not want to invite
even more international non-proliferation scrutiny and pressure at a time when Islamabad was
a#empting to manufacture nuclear weapons while
simultaneously maintaining close military ties with
the United States. Pakistani oﬃcials across the board
insist that Zia did not approve any nuclear dealings
with Iran that would involve the provision of sensitive technology. They argue that his strong Sunni
beliefs and his strategy to increase the role of Sunni
Islam throughout Pakistani society and oﬃcial institutions put him at odds with Iran’s Supreme Leader
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini and made any sensitive dealings with Iran very unlikely.
In '()*, the chairmen of the Pakistani and
Iranian atomic energy commissions entered into
a formal agreement on peaceful nuclear cooperation that emerged from oﬃcial contacts beginning
in February '()+ when Iran’s President Seyyed Ali
Khamenei (later supreme leader) visited Pakistan.4

an IISS strategic dossier

B.S.A. Tahir (courtesy Royal Malaysian Police)

This deal included a provision for Pakistani scientists
to train at least six Iranians at the Pakistan Institute
of Nuclear Science and Technology (PINSTECH),
training that was also oﬀered to other Muslim countries. That month, A.Q. Khan reportedly visited
Iran’s Bushehr reactor to witness the damage caused
by Iraqi bombing of the facility. In this and in subsequent visits he promoted centrifuges as a viable
uranium enrichment technique,5 a technology that
Iran had begun to explore in '(),.
In early '()* KRL scientists began to publish
papers describing the construction of more
advanced centrifuges with maraging steel. Because
KRL was now openly boasting about its technical
capabilities, foreign intelligence operatives started
taking notice, and some entered into direct communications concerning possible business transactions
with Khan and his cohorts.

1987 deal
A!er Zia parried Iran’s request for sensitive nuclear
cooperation, Iranian intelligence agents apparently
set about trying to find another way of tapping into
Pakistan’s nuclear technology. The first confirmed
contacts occurred in '()*. Which side initiated it
is unclear; Iran was looking to buy and Khan had
goods to sell. One contact was made in Switzerland,
possibly through one of Khan’s long-time associates
and regular suppliers, German engineer Go#hard
Lerch. The first substantial deal occurred in '()* in
Dubai, where Iranian oﬃcials reportedly met Indianborn businessman S. Mohamed Farouq, head of the
family-run computer import–export company SMB

67

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

A.Q. Khan Network Onward Proliferation: Chronology
Mid-1980s

December: Pakistani prime minister

Khan Research Laboratories (KRL)

Benazir Bhutto initiates deal with North

shifts its focus from P-1 t o P-2 centri-

Korea for No-dong missile technology

September: Libya receives 50kg of
UF6
2001

fuge technology
Iran begins to explore uranium
enrichment technology

1994

Feb: Khan network sends Libya

March, May: Iran begins to receive

Iran approaches Pakistan’s Zia ul-Haq
government for nuclear cooperation,

1,750kg of UF6

components for 500 P-1 centrifuges

March: Khan is removed from KRL

and P-2 drawings

December: Tahir signs $13m contract

but is reportedly rebuffed

with Malaysian company SCOPE for
1995

1986
Khan reportedly visits Iran’s Bushehr

25,000 centrifuge parts

November: North Korea and Pakistan

Late (or early 2002): Khan network

reportedly finalise No-dong deal

provides Libya with a design for a

reactor

nuclear weapon
1996–97

1987

Pakistan begins to receive No-dong

Pakistani and Iranian atomic energy
commissions

conclude

missiles from North Korea

2002
Iran procures magnets for P-2 centri-

formal

fuges from other foreign suppliers

agreement on peaceful nuclear

1997

cooperation

Network sends three P-2 centrifuges

Iran approaches Khan network
Khan network and Iran close $3
million deal for centrifuge technology

and claims no P-2 design work before

to Iran, according to Tahir (uncon-

this year
December: deliveries of P-2 compo-

firmed)

nents from SCOPE to Libya

Libyan intelligence first contacts Khan
Shipments to Libya begin (20

1989

complete P-1 centrifuges, most

First deliveries of P-1 centrifuges to

components for another 200) and

Iran

continue until late 2003

1990

1998

6 October: Iraqi intelligence memo

6 April: Khan tests Ghauri missile

2003
March: US government places sanctions on KRL
April: Interception of aluminium
tubing shipment en route to North
Korea
August: Iran changes story that its

cites offer from Khan intermediary to
help Iraq develop nuclear weapons
1991
November:

reported

agreement

between Pakistan’s General Mirza

enrichment programme was indigLate 1990s

enous, acknowledges to IAEA that

Khan reportedly begins delivery to

it obtained assistance from foreign

North Korea of used centrifuges,

intermediaries beginning in 1987.

drawings, depleted uranium hexaflu-

October: Interception of BBC China,

oride (UF6)

ship headed to Libya with compo-

Aslam Beg and Iran on nuclear and

nents for 1,000 centrifuges

conventional cooperation in return

1999

for oil

Last

1992

March: Saudi Arabian defence minister

December: Libya renounces nuclear
acknowledged

meeting

weapons programme

between Khan network and Iranians
North Korea begins to share missile
expertise with Pakistan

first foreign leader to visit KRL

2004
US–UK teams begin dismantlement

US intelligence report cites North

of Libyan programme, taking out

Korean enrichment programme

nuclear weapon designs, UF6, centri-

1993

fuges and other key equipment
2000

4 February: Khan’s public confession

P-1 centrifuge components and

September: Libya receives two P-2

March: BBC China delivers P-2 centri-

drawings for more advanced P-2

centrifuges, places order for 10,000

fuge parts to Libya from Turkish

machines

more

workshops

Buhary Syed Ali Tahir offers Iran

Key

68

Iran connection

Offer to Iraq

North Korea connection

Libya deal

Significant events

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

Group, and his Sri Lankan nephew Buhary Syed Ali
Tahir. (S. Mohamed Farouq should not be confused
with Muhammad Farooq, a centrifuge expert at KRL,
who was involved extensively with Khan’s nuclear
smuggling.) SMB had sold computers to Khan and
continued to operate a legitimate computer business until at least %&&-, but by '()* Farouq and
Tahir were also ready to act as Khan’s agents in
marketing P-' centrifuge components. The reported
presence in some of the '()* Dubai meetings of
German engineer Heinz Mebus6 (who died in '((%),
another long-time friend and supplier to Khan, is
further evidence that the Khan network was already
developing into a multinational import–export
organisation. A key Iranian interlocutor in the
'()* meetings was reportedly Mohammad Eslami,
representing an Iranian military front company.
Eslami is now a senior commander in the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard; his involvement indicates the
military orientation of the Iranian nuclear research
and development programme from as far back as
'()*.7
In a meeting in '()*, the Khan network submi#ed
a one-page handwri#en oﬀer, consisting of a menu
from which the Iranian buyers could choose, with
prices reportedly ranging from millions to hundreds
of millions of dollars. In what was cast as a fivepoint phased development plan, Iran was oﬀered:
a disassembled sample of P-' centrifuge machines;
drawings, descriptions and specifications for production; drawings, specifications and calculations for
a complete plant; materials for %,&&&-centrifuge
machines; and auxiliary vacuum and electric drive
equipment. The Iranians reportedly closed a deal
for ./ million in Dubai in '()*.8 They did not buy
everything on the list, instead deciding to procure
some items on their own, using the supplier information that Khan had also provided as a ‘buyer’s
guide’.9
At a '()* meeting in Dubai, or perhaps later
(Iran has not been forthcoming to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) about the details),
the network provided a ',-page document
describing procedures for the re-conversion and
casting of uranium metal into hemispheres, which
IAEA Director General Mohamed ElBaradei later
characterised as ‘related to the fabrication of nuclear
weapons components’ and a ‘ma#er of concern’.10
Iran’s claim that the Khan network provided the
document on its own initiative is not consistent
with what is known about the exchange of price
lists.11 The IAEA has not reported any evidence to

an IISS strategic dossier

contradict Iran’s claims that it did not purchase the
uranium re-conversion and casting equipment or
do anything else with the document. In %&&,, Iran
showed both the one-page handwri#en oﬀer and
the ',-page design document to the IAEA, but, as
of April %&&*, has not allowed it to take the originals back to Vienna, where they could be subject
to forensic examination to provide further clues
as to their origin. In %&&,, Iran also showed the
IAEA other documents relating to the '()* oﬀer,
including: drawings of components and assemblies
of P-' centrifuges; technical documents describing
manufacturing, assembly and operational procedures; diagrams of research centrifuge cascades;
and a design layout for six cascades of '+) machines
each.12 Iran later built a pilot plant at Natanz
designed to hold six cascades of '+- machines each.

Pakistani government attitudes
A!er the deaths of Zia in '()) and Khomeini in
'()(, new leaderships emerged in each country that
were much more inclined towards mutual cooperation on a wide range of issues. In Pakistan, General
Mirza Aslam Beg, the new chief of army staﬀ, openly
supported Iran’s cause and suggested that Pakistan
cooperate with Iran, Afghanistan and any new
Islamic republics that emerged from the dissolution
of the Soviet Union, in an alliance of sorts organised around ‘strategic defiance’ of the United States
and its Western allies. Beg has also been an ardent
supporter of Iran’s bid to acquire nuclear weapons.
Although his direct involvement is unconfirmed
and he denies it, he is widely suspected of having
been an accomplice of A.Q. Khan at least in terms
of awareness, if not encouragement or even outright
direction. According to US Ambassador to Pakistan
Robert Oakley and Assistant Secretary of Defense
Henry Rowen, Beg threatened to transfer nuclear
technology to Iran if Washington cut oﬀ arms sales
to Pakistan.13
Two unnamed former high-level Pakistani oﬃcials were reported as saying that in '()( President
Hashemi Rafsanjani sought Pakistani prime
minister Benazir Bhu#o’s consent regarding a deal
for nuclear weapons technology that Beg had initiated. The two oﬃcials say she told both Rafsanjani
and Beg that she did not approve.14 For his part, Beg
was quoted as saying that, by Bhu#o’s own account,
it was she who had been approached by the Iranians
with a similar proposition for a .- billion transfer.
Beg also said Iran was willing to pay .+bn or more.15
This price, however, seems exaggerated as it is very

69

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

much higher than Khan’s '()* and '((/ enrichment
deals with Iran.
Although Beg denies having authorised any
onward proliferation from Pakistan to Iran, he has
confirmed that serious nuclear discussions took
place between the nations at that time. According
to an unnamed former cabinet minister, these talks
continued a!er Benazir Bhu#o’s departure from
oﬃce in '((&.16 Several sources have reported that
an agreement was reached in '((' between General
Asif Nawaz, Beg’s successor as chief of army staﬀ,
Rafsanjani and General Mohsen Rezai, head of the
Revolutionary Guard, which involved Pakistani
nuclear weapons-related technology in return for
Iranian oil.17 Oakley claimed that Beg agreed to
abandon the deal at his urging, and that Nawaz
Sharif (the new prime minister) and Ghulam Ishaq
Khan (Zia’s successor as president and a trusted
insider since the days of Prime Minister Zulfiqar
Ali Bhu#o) told Rafsanjani that the deal had not
been approved by the president or the parliament
and that Pakistan would not implement it. Western
intelligence oﬃcials worried at the time that a deal
might have involved a nuclear weapon design that
Pakistan had originally obtained from China (which
later turned out to be the case for Khan’s deal with
Libya).
G.I. Khan provided continuity in the direction
of the nuclear weapons programme and protected
A.Q. Khan from government oversight (see chapter
four). Several of Benazir Bhu#o’s advisers, including
her security aﬀairs adviser, Major General Imtiaz
Ali, and her military secretary, Zulfiqar Ali, reportedly encouraged meetings between Khan and Iran.18
Bhu#o was reportedly aware of the nuclear discussions during both of her terms of oﬃce ('())–(&
and '((/–(+).19 These individual leaders may all
have been inclined to help Iran, especially a!er the
autumn of '((&. The US reaction to the Iraqi invasion
of Kuwait (% August) and the first-ever refusal by
the White House to certify to Congress that Pakistan
did not have a military nuclear programme because
of the incontrovertible evidence to the contrary ('
October) gave ammunition to those, such as Beg,
who urged defiance of the West.
However, no evidence has emerged that a clear
directive was ever given to Khan to provide nuclear
technology to Iran. In any case, the onward proliferation not only continued a!er the departure of
G.I. Khan, B. Bhu#o and Beg from power, but also
expanded, from '((-. The diﬀusion of domestic political power among the troika of the president, prime

70

minister and army chief obscured the command and
control authority over the covert nuclear weapons
programme. Further, as these power centres
jockeyed for supremacy, each undermined the
standing of the other. This situation provided Khan
with a relatively free rein as long as he did not
alienate the collective leadership and continued to
produce the desired results for the nation’s nuclear
weapons programme.

1993–94 deal
Iran received more from A.Q. Khan than nuclear
designs and equipment. The equipment supply
documents the Khan network provided the Iranians
allowed them to contact suppliers in Europe, Russia
and Asia to acquire nuclear-related equipment and
technologies. However, oﬃcials in Tehran realised
that mere shopping was not enough, and they again
turned to Khan for assistance. Iran claims that there
were no contacts with the network between '()*
and mid-'((/, when it says Tahir oﬀered to supply
an Iranian company with P-' designs and components for ,&& P-' machines, as well as drawings for
the more advanced P-% centrifuges. A!er the preliminary contacts, Rafsanjani sent Iranian oﬃcials to
Dubai to meet with Tahir and Farouq.20 A deal was
struck, an initial payment of ./m was made, and the
first deliveries started in early '((- using Iranian
merchant ships.21 The total amount of money Iran
paid and to whom it went is unknown. Whether
Iran obtained more than the ,&& unassembled
centrifuges it admi#ed to receiving from the Khan
network is also unknown. Iran told the IAEA in %&&/
that the centrifuges in its possession were domestically produced. But because the components had
been used in Pakistan’s own enrichment work, they
had traces of highly enriched uranium (HEU) particles. When the IAEA inspectors produced evidence
of those particles, Iran acknowledged the foreign
origin of the centrifuges.
Some of the old centrifuge machines were
reportedly damaged when the Iranians unpacked
and tried to assemble them. Iranian scientists found
it diﬃcult to advance from research to operational
enrichment, and blamed their lack of progress on
the ‘poor-quality components’ provided by the Khan
network.22 Acquiring the components, their specifications and detailed drawings, however, allowed
Iran to skip many research steps, in both centrifuge
operations and component manufacturing. It was
able to embark on a strategy to make thousands
of centrifuges on its own and to order parts from

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

companies in the Khan network. Iran continued to
draw on the advice of network intermediaries, by its
own admission meeting with them '/ times between
'((- and '(((.23
As Pakistan–Iran relations began to deteriorate
over the mounting proxy war and sectarian tensions
in Afghanistan, business with the Khan network
continued, although the Iranians did not entirely
trust A.Q. Khan because of the troubles they were
experiencing with his centrifuges. Diversifying
away from its reliance on Khan, Iran sought other
suppliers for the components and materials it
required. An Iranian contractor acknowledged
seeking to procure -,&&& magnets for use in P-%
centrifuges from a European intermediary. Iran
claims that none were delivered from the intermediary in question, but that other magnets relevant
to P-% centrifuges were procured from other foreign
suppliers in %&&%.24
In %&&+, when the IAEA was able to interview
Tahir for a second time (following up an initial %&&interview), he claimed, with no hint of purposeful
exaggeration, that three complete P-% centrifuges
were sent to Iran in '((* as a model for manufacturing more. However, he provided no supporting
documentation.25 Iran also admits to having received
P-% designs from the Khan network, but claims it
obtained no P-% centrifuges from abroad and that no
work was carried out on the P-% design prior to %&&%.
The IAEA has found inconsistencies in Iran’s story
about the P-%s, which, in %&&*, remained one of the
key outstanding questions for the agency. IAEA oﬃcials suspect Iran may have a parallel, undeclared
P-% development programme.
Over time, Iran gained experience in manufacturing its own centrifuge components and
constructed two facilities in Natanz, an aboveground pilot plant designed for ',&&& centrifuges
and a much larger underground facility planned to
hold ,-,&&& centrifuges. A facility this size would
give Iran the capability to produce approximately
%& bombs’ worth of HEU per year if it chose to
break out of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT) and acquire a nuclear weapons arsenal.26
Iran apparently only has the parts for several
thousand centrifuges, however, and to meet its
industrial-level goal it would have to rely on additional black market procurement of maraging steel,
and possibly other materials, in which it is not selfsuﬃcient. Nuclear Supplier Group export controls
and Security Council sanctions make that a diﬃcult
proposition for Iran.

an IISS strategic dossier

By the beginning of %&&*, Iran had about /*&
centrifuges running intermi#ently with uranium
hexafluoride (UF+) in the pilot plant and was beginning to install the first of what it said would be /,&&&
centrifuges in the underground facility. Although
Iran had not yet demonstrated an ability to run
the cascades continuously, it had proven that it
could produce centrifuges, balance and spin them
for months at a time, and enrich uranium in small
amounts to reactor-grade levels (/.,–,%). If Iran is
able to install /,&&& centrifuges and bring them into
operation (a goal it ambitiously set for May %&&*),
and if it were to throw caution to the wind and withdraw from the NPT, continuous operation of a facility
this size would, theoretically, enable Iran to produce
one weapon’s worth of HEU in (–'' months.27

Iraq
Given Khan’s budding business with Iran, it is
somewhat surprising that in '((& the network next
sought to expand its international business by selling
enrichment technology to Iraq, with which Iran had
just fought a bi#er eight-year
war. At the time, Iraq had
a very advanced clandestine programme to produce
The project had been
nuclear weapons. The full
extent of Iraq’s widespread
given the code name
and sophisticated nuclear
procurement activities was
‘A-B’, which IAEA
not well known until it came
to light a!er the '((' Gulf
investigators took to
War and the subsequent
weapons inspection and
mean ‘atomic bomb’
dismantlement campaign of
the United Nations Special
Commission on Iraq. Yet
Western governments and policy analysts – and
certainly Khan and his European colleagues – were
aware that Baghdad was renewing its eﬀorts to
build nuclear bombs in the a!ermath of the '()'
Israeli a#ack on Iraq’s Osirak reactor at Tuwaitha.
Iraq gave priority to the development of electromagnetic isotopic separation techniques to enrich
uranium, but also pursued gas centrifuge and other
enrichment technologies.28 Media accounts revealed
Iraqi a#empts to acquire maraging steel, vacuum
pumps and other specialised machinery, all necessary for the production of uranium enrichment
centrifuges. There were unconfirmed press reports
that Iraq acquired uranium melting information
from Pakistan in the late '()&s.29

71

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

A.Q. Khan and his associates apparently
believed that Iraq’s interest in uranium enrichment provided a business opportunity that was too
potentially lucrative to pass up. Information that
Khan had promoted a deal with Iraq emerged in
'((, with the defection of Saddam Hussein’s sonin-law, Hussein Kamel, who directed UN weapons
inspectors to a chicken farm he owned. There,
inspectors found thousands of documents on paper
and microfiche related to Iraq’s nuclear, biological
and chemical weapons development programmes.
Included among these documents was a '((& memo
labelled ‘top secret’ and ‘personal’, which described
a meeting in Baghdad between Iraqi intelligence
oﬃcers and an intermediary for Khan believed
to have used the name ‘Malik’. The intermediary
told the Iraqis that Khan was prepared to provide
enrichment technology and project designs for a
nuclear bomb and to ‘ensure any requirements or
materials from Western Europe [were transported]
via a company he owns in Dubai’. The memo said
‘the project has been given the code name “A-B”’,
which IAEA investigators took to mean ‘atomic
bomb’.30 The asking price was .,m in advance, with
an additional '&% commission to be paid on all
procurements.
Another document obtained by inspectors indicated that Jafar Dhia Jafar, the former head of Iraq’s
nuclear agency, had responded positively, telling
the intelligence service to explore the oﬀer, although
with the caveat that it could be a sting operation
orchestrated by Western intelligence agencies.
There was li#le other evidence of the oﬀer or any
other follow up, which in any case would have been
impossible a!er the initiation of Operation Desert
Storm in January '((' and the subsequent intrusive
inspection operations conducted by the UN. IAEA
eﬀorts to investigate the ma#er in the mid-'((&s,
and again in %&&- following Libya’s revelation that it
had received a bomb design from Khan, reached an
impasse because all the individuals involved were
either deceased or refused to be interviewed. IAEA
oﬃcials were nevertheless fully convinced that the
oﬀer was genuine and unsolicited.

North Korea
A.Q. Khan’s nuclear export business took a new
turn in the late '((&s when he provided North
Korea with a number of gas centrifuges, associated material and technical assistance, expanding
on deals in which North Korea provided No-dong
missiles to Pakistan. His foreign network associates

72

were not known to be involved in these transactions
– only Khan and his fellow Pakistani collaborators.
In his %&&+ autobiography, Musharraf wrote that in
early '(((, when he was serving as army chief, he
discovered that some North Korean nuclear experts,
operating under the guise of missile engineers, had
been given secret briefings at KRL. As described
below, North Korean interaction with KRL regarding
ballistic missile exchanges was permi#ed as a secret
government-to-government deal, but the Pakistani
government claims that A.Q. Khan was not authorised to interact with the North Koreans on nuclear
ma#ers. Musharraf wrote that he summoned him
to explain his interaction with the North Koreans
on nuclear technology, but Khan flatly denied the
charge.31
A!er Khan was arrested in %&&-, Pakistani
oﬃcials claimed that he had confessed to having
transferred centrifuges and related technology
to North Korea, beginning in the late '((&s.32 The
Clinton administration reportedly learnt of the
transfers in '(() or '(((. The first media claim of
a North Korean enrichment programme came in
March '(((, sourced to a US Department of Energy
intelligence report.33 The CIA concluded, however,
that North Korea began its centrifuge-based
uranium enrichment programme in %&&&.34 This
conclusion derived in part from imagery analysis
of unmarked containers loaded on Pakistani C-'/&
transport aircra!.
The most detailed account of the enrichment
technology transfer comes from Musharraf’s autobiography, in which he stated that ‘A.Q. Khan
transferred nearly two dozen P-' and P-% centrifuges
to North Korea. He also provided North Korea with
a flow meter, some special oils for centrifuges, and
coaching on centrifuge technology, including visits
to top-secret centrifuge plants.’35 Musharraf’s %&&+
account is curious in two respects. Firstly, in %&&,
he mentioned only half that number (‘probably a
dozen’).36 Western governments believe that the
actual number was about %&. Secondly, it was the
first reference to P-%s going to North Korea; previous
reports about Khan’s confessions mentioned only
P-' centrifuges. According to a government oﬃcial who briefed the press a!er Khan’s televised
confession, Khan, in a '%-page signed confession,
accepted full responsibility for ‘supplying old and
discarded centrifuge and enrichment machines
together with sets of drawings, sketches, technical
data and depleted hexafluoride (UF+) gas to North
Korea’.37

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

A dozen centrifuges would have been insuﬃcient to produce enough HEU for a nuclear bomb.
Along with the centrifuge designs Khan provided,
however, they could be used as a template upon
which North Korean scientists and engineers could
base their own centrifuge production plans. As with
Iran, Khan also reportedly provided a ‘shopping
list’ to North Korea,38 which enabled Pyongyang
to purchase additional components directly from
other foreign suppliers. In %&&&, North Korea began
to seek such materials in industrial-scale quantities, leading intelligence analysts to believe that it
had progressed beyond the research and development stage in its uranium enrichment centrifuge
programme. Such procurement a#empts included
equipment suitable for use in UF+ feed and withdrawal systems, as well as high-strength aluminium
tubes that matched the specifications of vacuum
casings for Urenco centrifuges.39 In April %&&/, the
French, German and Egyptian authorities intercepted a French cargo ship in the Suez Canal
carrying a %%-tonne shipment of these tubes that
North Korea had ordered from a German firm. This
shipment was apparently part of a larger, %&&-tonne
consignment of aluminium tubes sought by North
Korea, which would have been suﬃcient for /,,&&–
-,&&& centrifuges. If North Korea were to construct
/,,&& centrifuges based on the P-% design, it would
have the ability to produce almost (&kg of weaponsgrade HEU annually.40 North Korea a#empted to
circumvent German export controls by claiming
that the tubes were intended for a Chinese company,
Shenyang Aircra! Corporation.41
As is the case with some of Khan’s other
customers, which side initiated the centrifuge deal
is unclear. As noted in chapter two, there were
a few reports in the late '()&s of North Korean
procurement of equipment useful for gas centrifuge enrichment. Until Khan provided centrifuges
a decade later, however, North Korea’s nuclear
weapons programme was assumed to be limited to
the plutonium route. North Korea froze the plutonium programme under the terms of the October
'((- Agreed Framework deal with the US. Seeking
an alternative uranium enrichment path to nuclear
weapons violated that agreement and, when the US
confronted Pyongyang about the enrichment eﬀorts,
led to its demise. Whether North Korea nevertheless proactively sought the centrifuge technology
or whether, as one former US negotiator privately
surmised, it ‘fell into their laps’ through a Khan
oﬀer, is unknown.

an IISS strategic dossier

Pakistan–North Korea connections
Khan’s business dealings with North Korea were
rooted in Pakistan’s odd relationship with the
Pyongyang regime, dating back to the early '(*&s.
At that time, Zulfiqar Ali Bhu#o, whose original
People’s Party had strong socialist overtones, was
impressed with the regimented government and
economy of Kim Il Sung. Bhu#o was known to be
an admirer of many of the revolutionary leaders of
the time, including Mao Zedong, Josip Broz Tito
and Colonel Muammar Gadhafi, and had a material interest in improving ties with these leaders too.
Ever since the United States had embargoed military sales to Pakistan a!er the '(+, Kashmir War,
Pakistan looked to the East as an alternative source,
and purchased a mix of Chinese and Russian
weapons, equipment and transports. The military
items produced by North Korea were compatible with other Soviet-bloc
material and were considerably cheaper. Moreover,
the North Koreans were
Whether North Korea
easier to deal with than the
Soviets, who had a far closer
proactively sought the
relationship with India.
Bhu#o approached North
centrifuge technology or
Korea in '(*' for assistance
in replenishing Pakistan’s
whether it ‘fell into their
depleted stock of military
equipment and established
laps’ is unknown
full diplomatic relations in
'(*+, when he was accorded
an elaborate welcome in
Pyongyang. His daughter, Benazir Bhu#o, received
a similarly lavish state reception '* years later, in
December '((/. Like her father, she also secured an
agreement to acquire missile technology.42
The ‘Asian cooperation’ policy forged by Zulfiqar
Ali Bhu#o in the '(*&s, however, became less significant a!er his ouster in the July '(** coup orchestrated
by Zia, in his capacity as army chief. A!er the Soviet
Union invaded Afghanistan in December '(*(,
and the new US government of President Ronald
Reagan li!ed all sanctions on Pakistan in '()', Zia’s
priorities shi!ed to the jihad in Afghanistan and
the acquisition of Western armaments to restore the
military balance with India. North Korea had disappeared from Pakistan’s radar screen. Within a few
years, however, three factors brought North Korea
and Pakistan back towards a strategic partnership.
Firstly, Pakistan needed to match India’s Agni and
Prithvi ballistic-missile programmes, and North

73

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

Korea was known for its ballistic-missile production. Secondly, the Pakistani armed forces needed
conventional weapons, including artillery and antiaircra! guns, which North Korea had, while North
Korea needed money and had a reputation for
exporting military supplies at cheap rates. Thirdly,
North Korea was developing expertise on the plutonium route to nuclear weapons production, and
Pakistan was making rapid advances along the
uranium enrichment route. Each country stood to
gain much from the other.
In the '((&s, Pakistan’s security predicament was
compounded by new two factors, both involving
India. The first had to do with the growing airpower imbalance with India and Pakistan’s desire to
obtain a reliable airborne nuclear delivery system.
Washington’s October '((& implementation of the
Pressler Amendment sanctions essentially froze
Pakistan’s air force procurement, save for some
imports of low-technology aircra! from China. The
delivery of F-'+ aircra! that Islamabad had already
purchased from the United States was stalled, and
because of intense US pressure and their own nonproliferation concerns, European suppliers were
reluctant to come to Pakistan’s assistance.
The second factor that worried Pakistani defence
planners was the rapid maturation of India’s ballistic
missile programme in the wake of a military crisis
over Kashmir in '((&. India first test-fired its shortrange Prithvi ballistic missile in February '()) and
introduced Prithvi missile ba#eries into service
with the army in '((-.43 Further, the two-stage
intermediate-range Agni-' ballistic missile, which
the Indians considered a technology demonstrator
and not a developed weapons system, underwent three test flights between '((- and %&&%. The
emergence of an Indian ballistic-missile capability
created a new missile gap for Pakistan, and also
raised the prospect that India would have both
missile and aircra! delivery systems for its covert
nuclear arsenal, while Pakistan would not have
much of either. To compound Pakistan’s problems,
the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR),
which was originally established in '()*, was
now operating rather eﬀectively. Most European
suppliers were members of the MTCR group and
thus refused to supply Pakistan with the means to
produce missile delivery systems.

Khan’s contacts with Pyongyang
Just as A.Q. Khan filled a vital strategic need when
US and French non-proliferation pressures blocked

74

Pakistan’s plutonium route to nuclear weapons in
the '(*&s, Khan stepped in once again to provide
Pakistan with an alternative nuclear weapons
delivery option by obtaining intermediate-range
liquid-fuel ballistic missiles from North Korea.
Prior to this development, Pakistan had obtained
short-range, solid-fuel M-'' missiles and related
technology from China, Pakistan’s all-weather
strategic ally, but KRL was not the recipient. The
solid-fuel missile programme was the research
and development responsibility of the National
Defence Complex in conjunction with PAEC.
KRL was responsible for the liquid-fuel missile
programme. North Korea’s ',&&&–',,&&km-range
No-dong ballistic missile was well suited to Pakistan’s
pressing strategic requirement. (The range of the
No-dong, like that of virtually all ballistic missiles,
depends on the payload weight and other design
configurations.) The sharing of missile expertise
began in '((%, when Pakistani oﬃcials travelled to
North Korea to view a prototype of the No-dong. In
November '((,, North Korea and Pakistan apparently struck a deal for '%–%, No-dong missiles, and
at least one transporter erector launcher or mobile
erector launcher,44 the delivery of which reportedly
began in '((+–(*.
It is widely assumed, but impossible to prove,
that the provision of centrifuge technology was at
least partly in exchange for the No-dong missiles,
and that the deal was authorised by Pakistan’s
top leaders. According to North Korean Politburo
defector Hwang Jang Yop, a No-dong–HEU deal
was concluded in the summer of '((+.45 Overhead
imagery of Pakistani aircra! in Pyongyang is o!en
cited as proof of oﬃcial involvement in the nuclear
deal.46 It is likely that at least some of the centrifuges, parts, blueprints, designs and possibly UF+
North Korea obtained were transported in C-'/&s
belonging to the Pakistani air force or to charter
companies connected to the air force. It was much
easier for Khan to ship nuclear components to
North Korea than to Iran because there was already
an authorised trade in sensitive military equipment with Pyongyang dating from the early '(*&s.
Pakistani aircra! carried ballistic missiles and their
components, surface-to-air missiles, artillery and
other conventional military equipment from North
Korea.47 The business activities of KRL had grown
over the years, involving much more than simply
nuclear enrichment, and extending to the production of missiles, mines, electronics and artillery.48
Khan also bought anti-tank missiles from North

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

Korea to help fulfil KRL’s orders from the Pakistani
army. This conventional trade could have masked
nuclear traﬃcking. Movements of military cargo in
and out of Pakistan at that time were characterised
by extreme secrecy and compartmentalisation. US
arms shipments through Pakistan for anti-Soviet
forces in Afghanistan contributed to a climate in
which questions were not asked about arms imports
and exports. In one incident in %&&&, Pakistani
intelligence authorities had obtained a foreign
liaison tip-oﬀ that a chartered C-'/& aircra! going
to North Korea to pick up conventional missiles
was carrying ‘irregular cargo’ on Khan’s behalf.
Pakistani intelligence operatives quietly raided
the aircra!, but found nothing. Apparently, Khan
had been tipped oﬀ (see pages (+–*).49 The fact that
there was an unannounced search suggests that
such cargo was not regularly screened.50 In sum,
evidence of oﬃcial Pakistani–North Korean sensitive technology transactions does not necessarily
indicate oﬃcial Pakistani–North Korean nuclear
collaboration.
Pakistani policymakers knew, of course, about
the cooperation with North Korea on missiles, many
of them having been directly involved in its continuation. It seems unlikely that they would have been
unaware of the nuclear cooperation that was occurring at the same time. Although Khan and his KRL
team were able to make many decisions independently, they had no authority on national security
decisions. According to an unconfirmed press report,
Khan claimed that three diﬀerent army chiefs of
staﬀ – Abdul Waheed ('((-–(+), Jehangir Karamat
('((+–()) and Pervez Musharraf ('(()–present) –
were aware of his nuclear deals with Pyongyang.51
Current and former military oﬃcers strongly deny
this accusation, but the military’s dominant role in
nuclear oversight since '(** is reason to believe that
Khan would not have traded the centrifuge technology without the army’s approval. The armed
forces certainly would have been privy to any
discussions concerning the acquisition of the Nodong, a system carrying serious implications for
any military force posture. Transferring nuclear
technology to the North Korean pariah state would
also have had severe consequences for the nation’s
foreign policy and international reputation. The
claim that Khan could not have sold his country’s
nuclear secrets without the expressed approval of
Pakistani civilian and military leaders is supported
by an economic rationale, in the sense that many
analysts doubt Pakistan could have paid for the

an IISS strategic dossier

missiles outright. In '((+, Pakistan was in a financial
crisis, with its foreign exchange reserves equivalent to only three weeks of imports. The country
was only able to avoid default with help from the
International Monetary Fund and by borrowing
.,&&m from domestic banks.52
Beginning with Benazir Bhu#o, successive
Pakistani governments have insisted that the
ballistic missile cooperation with North Korea was
based on a cash payment, rather than a quid pro quo
exchange for Pakistani nuclear technology. Pakistan
claims it paid a total of .%'&m to North Korea for
the entire missile package, including the transfer of
technology.53 It is diﬃcult to corroborate this claim
through publicly available information. The figure
is low in comparison with the ./bn Saudi Arabia
reportedly paid for /+–-& Chinese CSS-% ballistic
missiles in the late '()&s. On
the other hand, .%'&m for the
No-dong package is in line
with estimates that the shorter
Evidence of official
range Hwasong-, and -+
missiles cost around .'.,–%m
sensitive technology
each and that the longer-range
Taepo-dong has been priced
transactions does not
at .+m.54 Given the enormous strategic importance of
necessarily indicate
No-dong missiles to national
defence, .%'&m would have
official nuclear
been within Pakistan’s financial means. Despite its low
collaboration
foreign reserves, Pakistan’s
arms imports during the
'((,–(+
timeframe
were
valued at .)'(m.55 The overall defence budget in the
mid-'((&s was around ./bn annually.56
A diﬃculty in assessing the Pakistani government claim is that there is li#le public evidence of
monetary payments from North Korea to Khan or
his associates for the centrifuges. The Islamabad
government would have an incentive to disclose
any such transactions that might have come to light
in its investigations of Khan because this would
help to distance the government from Khan’s transactions. But to date no such evidence has surfaced.
One other possible explanation for Khan’s
nuclear assistance to North Korea was that he acted
largely of his own volition, for his own profit. As
already noted, Khan had broad autonomy as head
of KRL. There appears to have been poor state
control of critical nuclear technologies and components, including centrifuges. Khan could ship large

75

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

consignments in and out of the country with li#le
oversight, particularly before the creation of the
military’s Strategic Plans Division in '(((. In this
scenario, Khan could have begun to assist North
Korea in the late '((&s for personal gain. At this
time, his own importance was diminishing because
PAEC, not KRL, was responsible for weaponising
Pakistan’s deterrent. He would also have had a
motivation to spur North Korea to speed up deliveries of No-dong missile technology, allowing Khan
to test the Ghauri in '((), a full year before PAEC
could field a solid-fuel alternative.57 The broad
cooperation between Pyongyang and Islamabad,
however, is significant reason to suspect state
complicity, at least in terms of having knowledge
of and thereby implicitly condoning the centrifuge
deal.

Libya
In '((*, the Khan network began what became
an extensive nuclear export business with Libya,
involving nuclear specialists, middlemen and
supplier companies from three continents. Of all
Khan’s deals, the most is known about the Libya
connection because of Tripoli’s disclosures and its
cooperation with inspectors a!er Gadhafi decided
in %&&/ to renounce and dismantle his nuclear and
chemical weapons programmes and to restrict its
ballistic-missile capacity. Following on from secret
negotiations with the US and UK to li! sanctions
implemented in response to the Lockerbie bombing,
Libya contacted MI+, the UK intelligence service,
in mid-March %&&/ to initiate talks on dismantling
strategic weapons programmes in exchange for
removing other sanctions and normalising relations. Secret talks then expanded to include the
US. Libya was reluctant to acknowledge the full
extent of its nuclear programme, however, until
the German-registered vessel, BBC China, bound
for Libya with centrifuge equipment from the
Khan network, was diverted to Italy in a joint US–
UK–Germany–Italy operation. This interdiction
demonstrated to Tripoli that its clandestine supply
network had been compromised. The US and UK
intelligence oﬃcials involved in the highly confidential negotiations provided additional evidence
of what they knew and, in December %&&/, Libya
revealed even more. During a trip by MI+ and CIA
oﬃcers to Libya early that month, Libya handed
over a copy of a nuclear weapon design that it
had received from the Khan network,58 as detailed
below.

76

Libya’s unrelenting interest in nuclear weapons
Gadhafi’s aspirations for acquiring weapons of
mass destruction had been widely known ever
since he overthrew King Idris I in '(+(. In the '(*&s,
Gadhafi’s endeavours to buy nuclear weapons
oﬀ the shelf took him to China, France, India and
the Soviet Union. These eﬀorts did not yield any
results; however, Gadhafi did succeed in acquiring
%,%+/ tonnes of yellowcake (uranium oxide concentrate) from Niger in '(*) and '()'.59 In the same
period, Gadhafi befriended Zulfiqar Ali Bhu#o,
who was vigorously pursuing nuclear weapons
in response to India’s May '(*- nuclear explosive
test. Bhu#o was in desperate need of finances, as
well as raw materials, for a crash programme that
Pakistan had embarked upon with very li#le prior
infrastructure. During '(*/–)%, Gadhafi reportedly
provided financial assistance and passed -,& tonnes
of the yellowcake Libya had obtained from Niger to
Pakistan.60 In return, Libya apparently sought assistance from Pakistan with ‘hot cells’ for extracting
plutonium from irradiated uranium.61 Libya had
hoped that Pakistan would provide weapons-related
technology in return for aid. Libya reportedly
gave .'&&–,&&m to Bhu#o, whose Islamic rhetoric
about the programme excited many revolutionary
leaders of the time.62 However, on the governmentto-government level Pakistan agreed only to oﬀer
training for Libyan personnel at PINSTECH and
no more. The Pakistan–Libya nuclear cooperation
at the government-to-government level ended once
Bhu#o was overthrown.
For a decade from the mid-'()&s onwards, the
Libyan nuclear programme was largely frustrated by
the unwillingness of potential nuclear suppliers to
deal with the regime.63 Libya acknowledged that, in
July '((,, it made a strategic decision to reinvigorate
its nuclear activities, including gas centrifuge enrichment.64 At this point, Libya tried to set up a two-track
programme. The first track involved a plutonium
route for which it unsuccessfully sought assistance
from Argentina, the Soviet Union, Bulgaria and
Japan. Its second track was to follow the uranium
enrichment route to fissile-material production. In
the early '((&s Libya had managed only to operate
a single centrifuge, which it had obtained from
Germany. In '((*, Libyan intelligence initiated
contact with Khan, and followed up with a meeting
in Istanbul among Libyan intelligence agency head
Matooq Mohammed Matooq, A.Q. Khan and Tahir,
to conclude a deal for the wherewithal for a uraniumcentrifuge enrichment programme.

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

Selected companies reported to have manufactured, supplied or attempted to supply Libya
with gas centrifuge components or relevant machinery
Ring magnets
KRL, Pakistan

Non-corrosive pipes
and valves
KRL, Pakistan
TradeFin, South Africa
CETEC, Switzerland
SMB Computers, Dubai

Aluminium or
maraging steel

Upper
(magnetic)
bearing

Feed
Product

Waste

Distributor

Centre post
(stationary)
Top end cap

KRL, Pakistan
SCOPE, Malaysia
Bikar Mettale Asia,
Singapore

Top scoop

Casing

Baffle (rotating)

Flow-forming or
balancing equipment

Rotor

KRL, Pakistan
TradeFin, South Africa
Traco, Switzerland
De Young Engineering,
South Korea

Baffle
Bottom scoop

End-cap and baffle

KRL, Pakistan
SCOPE, Malaysia
SMB Computers, Dubai

Bottom end cap
Vacuum
pump

Vacuum pumps

KRL, Pakistan
Krisch Engineering, South
Africa
TradeFin, South Africa

Power supply

Lower bearing

KRL, Pakistan
SMB Computers, Dubai
ETI Elektroteknik, Turkey
EKA, Turkey

Three-dimensional
measuring machine
Mitutoyo, Japan

Electromagnetic
motor

This image is adapted from a chart first produced by the Center for Nonproliferation Studies in
January 2005. Some more recent information has been added. Not all of these companies were
aware of the end use of the components or machinery that they supplied or manufactured.

Centrifuge enrichment equipment
Shortly a!er Libya’s initial contact with Khan in
'((*, the Khan network started to send Libya %&
complete P-' aluminium rotor centrifuges (redesignated as L-'s for ‘Libya-'’), along with most
of the components for an additional %&& centrifuges.
The aluminium rotors and ring magnets were mysteriously missing. In %&&&, Khan sent Libya two test
P-% (renamed L-%) maraging steel centrifuges. Both
of these centrifuges had been used in the Pakistani
nuclear programme, and both were contaminated

an IISS strategic dossier

OIL

with HEU particles. Gadhafi then ordered '&,&&&
additional P-% centrifuges, enough to produce significant quantities of weapons-grade uranium a!er
they were installed and operating eﬀectively. The
first deliveries were made in December %&&%. The
focal point of the Libyan research and development
activities was a facility named Al Hashan on the
outskirts of Tripoli. By April %&&%, one nine-machine
cascade had reportedly been completed and was
under vacuum with all the pipes, electrical connections and processing equipment set up. But for

77

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

unknown reasons Libya then decided to dismantle
the cascades and to move them to Al Fallah. By the
end of %&&/, the Gadhafi regime had acquired a
significant number of L-% components, but again, no
rotating parts were delivered, apparently because
of diﬃculties manufacturing them in the network’s
overseas facilities. The network considered making
them in Dubai, South Africa, Turkey and Malaysia,
but for reasons that remain unclear ultimately
decided to produce the rotors in Libya itself. When
US and UK oﬃcials and IAEA inspectors arrived in
late December %&&/ and January %&&- to begin the
dismantlement process that Libya had pledged, the
components were still unassembled and were found
in unopened boxes. Libya also received computer
compact disks containing a full set of P-' and P-%
centrifuge drawings together with assembly and
test instruction manuals. The network arranged
training in Europe, Africa, the Middle East and
Southeast Asia for Libyan technical personnel.65 To
manufacture centrifuge components that were diﬃcult to procure elsewhere, particularly the maraging
steel rotors, and to repair damaged centrifuges,
the network established a workshop at Janzour,
Libya, code-named Project Machine Shop !""!, and
purchased the necessary machining equipment.
Supplying '&,&&& centrifuges, each of which has
approximately '&& parts, meant that the supplier
network would have to procure or manufacture
over a million components and ship them all to
Libya. Some of these components must have been
diﬃcult for Khan to procure through the network’s
traditional means. Khan’s supply to Iran and North
Korea of designs, mostly used centrifuges and
components, and UF+ was bold enough (although
the full extent of Khan’s sale to both countries is
unknown). The enormous Libyan project posed
problems that were vastly more complicated. To
meet the challenge, the Khan network increased the
capacity of front companies in Malaysia, Turkey and
South Africa (as described below) to manufacture
certain products and, in Khan’s biggest innovation,
to establish factories in non-traditional supplier
countries to procure, assemble and manufacture the
components for the enrichment process.66

Uranium hexafluoride
As part of the %&&& deal to supply '&,&&& P-% centrifuges, the Khan network agreed to sell Libya %&
tonnes of UF+ (enough, when enriched to (/%, for
about three implosion-type weapons). Probably
because of diﬃculties obtaining that amount, less

78

than % tonnes were delivered: two small cylinders in
September %&&&, one containing %,kg of unenriched
UF+ and one with the same amount of UF+ with
depleted uranium (.&/% U%/,); and in February %&&',
',*&&kg of UF+ slightly enriched to '%. The origin of
the uranium has not been definitively established,
but the evidence points to North Korea with Pakistan
and Dubai as transit points. Tahir told Malaysian
investigators that the UF+ was shipped on Pakistani
planes, although Pakistan says it came from North
Korea. Suspect bank transactions preceding the UF+
transfers include a payment made by Libya, and a
North Korean receipt of a similar amount, although
not necessarily enough to cover that amount of
UF+.67 There seems to be no doubt that the cask
containing the %,kg of UF+ originated in Pakistan.68 It
is not confirmed where the cask had been and what
was the origin of the material inside it. US experts
detected plutonium traces on the container that
were identical to traces previously found at North
Korea’s Yongbyon complex, which indicates that
the container was as some point in proximity to that
site.69 IAEA tests on the same container did not yield
the same plutonium traces,70 although the IAEA
swipe samples were not as extensive as those taken
by the US of the entire container. The isotopic composition of the UF+ itself did not match known samples
of uranium from anywhere else in the world.71 By a
process of elimination, and in connection with the
plutonium particles and the suspect bank accounts,
US intelligence analysts deduced that it came from
North Korea. This analytical conclusion, however,
does not conclusively rule out other countries as the
source of the UF+. And there is no other evidence
that North Korea has a uranium-conversion facility
capable of producing the uranium gas.
One additional possibility is that North Korea
sent natural yellowcake to Pakistan, which Pakistan
then converted and shipped to Libya,72 but this
hypothesis is flawed. While KRL almost certainly
had the means to convert uranium gas into uranium
metal, there is no evidence that Khan had the expertise and equipment to turn yellowcake into uranium
tetrafluoride and then into UF+. If Khan had such a
capability, it seems likely that he would have oﬀered
it to other countries, but there is no evidence that
Khan oﬀered any country assistance with uranium
conversion. Libya did import (but never used) a
modular uranium-conversion facility in '()+ from a
Japanese company that was not known to be linked
with the Khan network (the name of the company
has not been disclosed). If Pakistan were assisting

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

Khan network: Main nodes for Libya operation
Ireland

Turkey

United
Kingdom

Selim Alguadis, Elektronik
Kontrol Aletleri (Turkish)
Gunes Jireh, ETI Elektronik
(Turkish)
[Henk Slebos]

Germany

Netherlands
Henk Slebos, Slebos
Research (Dutch)
Switzerland

France

Switzerland

Italy

Portugal Spain

Syria

Tunisia

Morocco

Iraq

Jordan
Algeria

Libya

Iran

Afghanistan

Pakistan
A.Q. Khan

Pakistan

Egypt

Western
Sahara
Mauritania

China

Turkey

Greece

F. Tinner, CETEC (Swiss)
M. Tinner, Traco Co. (Swiss)
G. Lerch (German)

Saudi Arabia
India
Mali

Niger

Chad

Sudan

Myanmar
Thailand

Yemen

Nigeria
Ethiopia

Zambia

Dubai

Cameroon

Somalia

Central
Gabon African
DR Congo
Repubic

Kenya

S.M. Farong, SMB group (Indian)
B.S.A. Tahir, SMB group (Sri Lankan)

Indonesia

Tanzania

Malaysia

Angola

Urs Tinner, SCOPE (Swiss)
[B.S.A. Tahir]
[F. Tinner]
[M. Tinner]

Zambia

Namibia

Mozambique
Zimbabwe

South Africa

Key
Names in [square brackets]
were involved in area but not
based there

South Africa

North Korea in making UF+, it would point to oﬃcial
state involvement through PAEC, the organisation responsible for Pakistan’s uranium-conversion
capability. To date, there has been no allegation of
PAEC involvement with Libya.

Bomb design
Libya claimed that the documents for a nuclear
weapon design and fabrication that it received
from the Khan network in late %&&' or %&&% had
been provided as a ‘bonus’ for .%&–,&m and that it
took no steps to assess the credibility or to explore
the practical utility of the information – an assertion viewed with scepticism by the IAEA.73 The
documentation included assembly drawings and
manufacturing instructions for components of the
‘physics package’: explosive parts of the weapon,
the detonator and fissile materials. It did not include
the associated electronics, cabling and firing sets.
Also missing were some of the key scale drawings
of the explosive lenses. The bomb design was about
(,% complete and was far more detailed than what
has been available on the internet or through other

an IISS strategic dossier

Madagascar

Botswana

Johan Meyer, TradeFin
Engineering (SA)
Gerhard Wisser (German)
Daniel Geiges (SA)

© IISS

unclassified sources. The material laid out a step-bystep process of casting uranium into a metal bomb
core and building the explosive lenses to compress
the core.74 The designs were for a ten-kilotonne
implosion device following a late '(+&s Chinese
design, weighing -,/kg. It was too large to fit on any
missiles in Libya’s arsenal. Many of the bomb design
documents were described as copies of copies,
and included handwri#en notes from lectures by
Chinese weapons experts, that seemed to confirm
that they had been reviewed by KRL.75 In January
%&&-, Libya turned over to the US and UK (through
the IAEA) the design documents in the form
Libya said they had come, wrapped in the original
Islamabad drycleaner’s bag. (As noted above, Libya
had already provided a copy to UK and US intelligence oﬃcials a month earlier.) Lacking trained
personnel in the necessary fields, it is unlikely that
Libya would have been able to fill in the missing
drawings on its own to produce a workable bomb.
On the other hand, if Iraq, North Korea or Iran,
with their much larger industrial infrastructure and
cadres of qualified engineers, had received the same

79

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

set of designs, they probably could have completed
the missing pages indigenously. As discussed below,
whether any other customer received a bomb design
is unknown. That such a national security asset was
included so casually in the deal with Libya is reason
to believe that the Khan–Libya nuclear connection
was not authorised by the Pakistani government.

The make-up of the Khan network
The Khan network was not a hierarchically structured enterprise, but rather a collection of connected
nodes in various countries, which sometimes
operated in league with Khan and at other times
functioned independently. At least /& companies
and middlemen sold nuclear-related goods through
the network.76 The vast majority of individuals
involved in the Khan proliferation network had a
long history of procuring and selling items for the
Pakistani nuclear weapons programme. And when
Khan managed to shi! his primary business operations from imports to much more lucrative exports,
many of his European and
South African accomplices
stayed with him. The new
Libya had almost no pre‘business model’ orientation oﬀered the European
existing capability and
members of the network
much more money in
wanted the Khan network
comparison to what they
had previously got from
to facilitate the entire
Pakistan’s secret nuclear
programme coﬀers, and
enrichment process
they were asked to carry on
with the very same expertise
in manufacturing, logistics
and finances that they had
developed to such perfection in aiding the Pakistani
(and, in some cases, Iraqi) nuclear weapons eﬀort.
The Libya deal showcased the organisation’s
complex and transnational nature and diﬀered
from the Khan network’s transactions with Iran and
North Korea in three important respects. Firstly,
most of the proliferation occurred a!er Khan was
removed from KRL in %&&' for defying government
a#empts to control his foreign dealings (see pages
(+–)). Secondly, it was the first time the network had
managed to produce outside any single country the
entire panoply of materials, tools and technologies
needed to fabricate gas centrifuges for uranium
enrichment. Thirdly, the deal diﬀered in scale from
those involving Iran and North Korea because each
of those countries already had a fair degree of tech-

80

nological expertise in the nuclear sciences. Libya
had almost no pre-existing capability and wanted
the Khan network to facilitate the entire enrichment
process.
Libya contracted Khan to manufacture centrifuge
components, to assemble them into workable centrifuges ‘oﬀsite’, and then to install and operate them
at a location outside Tripoli. The vast size and scope
of the order broke new ground for the network,
requiring Khan to transform both his organisation
and its business practices to provide full service
as a completely private sector entity. The Libyan
case also reveals how sophisticated the network
had become. Khan suggested, for example, that the
Libyans build sheds for centrifuges that would look
like goat or camel farms as a means of camouflage.
The manner in which the business was conducted
would have maximised profits for the network and
kept the Libyan programme dependent on Khan for
advice for many years into the future.
The Dubai hub: A!er Khan was removed from KRL

in March %&&' (see chapter four) he moved his base
of network operations to Dubai.77 This was where
components were stored and transhipped, and
where his most important associate, Tahir, kept
oﬃce, as managing director of the SMB Group, a
position he took over from his uncle Farouq. Tahir
was Khan’s main intermediary with Tripoli when the
Libya operation began in '((*. Other Dubai-based
companies, such as the Aryash Trading Company
and Gulf Technical Industries (GTI), o!en appear in
reports on the Khan network as prominent links in
the traﬃc in sensitive items. GTI was managed by
British citizen Peter Griﬃn and his son Paul, both of
whom deny any wrongdoing and against whom no
charges have been filed.
The South African connection: In South Africa, the

Khan network worked with companies and experts
who had been involved with the South African
nuclear weapons programme before it was abandoned in '((/. One such expert was Gerhard
Wisser, a German living in South Africa, who had
supplied vacuum pumps and other equipment to
Pakistan in the '()&s in addition to doing work for
the South African nuclear programme. In Dubai in
'(((, Tahir oﬀered Wisser a lucrative commission
to arrange for the manufacture of ‘certain pipework systems’. Wisser engaged a former associate
who had also worked for the South African nuclear
programme, Johan Meyer, owner of the engineering

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

components were destined for a nuclear weapons
programme in Libya.79 The two-year ./.,m contract
was signed in the name of GTI, though Peter Griﬃn
denied any involvement, arguing that Tahir had
forged the documents.80 At Tahir’s request, Urs
Tinner, son of long-time Khan associate Friedrich
Tinner, began consulting for the SCOPE factory and
arranged to import lathes as well as cu#ing, turning
and grinding machines. Between December %&&%
and August %&&/, SCOPE manufactured and sent
'- types of centrifuge components (of the approximately '&& components needed in total) to Dubai.
The Turkish mini-hub: The Khan network relied on

SCOPE invoice to Desert Electrical Equipment Factory, Dubai
(courtesy Royal Malaysian Police)

firm TradeFin, based in Vanderbiljpark. Along with
a third associate, Swiss citizen Daniel Geiges, they
built a complex steel system to feed and withdraw
UF+ gas into a centrifuge cascade. The massive
system filled '' -&-foot shipping containers and was
estimated to be worth .//m. The network also asked
TradeFin to manufacture maraging steel rotors
for Libya’s L-% centrifuges. In late %&&&, TradeFin
ordered a specialised Spanish-made lathe from GTI
but ultimately decided not to produce the rotors,
either because of a price dispute or because they
were unable to acquire the maraging steel that was
needed. TradeFin consequently returned the lathe to
GTI in December %&&'. In %&&-, inspectors discovered the lathe in Libya.78
The Malaysian production plan: To evade export

controls from members of the Nuclear Suppliers
Group and to take advantage of his Malaysian
wife’s connections, Tahir contracted Scomi Group
Berhad, a Malaysian oil and gas firm, to manufacture thousands of centrifuge components for the
Libya operation. Scomi set up a subsidiary, Scomi
Precision Engineering (SCOPE), with a -&-person
facility in Shah Alam, Malaysia, but Scomi oﬃcials have been cleared of having known that the

an IISS strategic dossier

workshops in Turkey as mini-hubs to procure subcomponents from Europe and elsewhere, and to
assemble centrifuge motors and frequency converters
to spin the centrifuges at the high speeds necessary
to separate diﬀerent uranium isotopes.81 Elektronik
Kontrol Aletleri (president: Selim Alguadis) and
ETI Elektroteknik (president: Gunes Jireh, company
partly owned by Dutch businessman Henk Slebos)
imported centrifuge motors and aluminium castings from Europe, assembled them, and sent them
to Dubai. Alguadis contends that he did not know
their destination was Libya. In %&&/, a shipment
of electrical components was sent with false enduser certificates to Dubai, and was loaded aboard
the BBC China. When the ship was diverted to the
southern Italian port of Taranto in October %&&/ and
Italian authorities removed a shipment of centrifuge
components from Malaysia, the other components
from Turkey were not discovered and continued on
to Libya. The Libyan government alerted international inspectors to their arrival in Tripoli in March
%&&- and they were subsequently removed by the
US.82
Other manufacturing sites: The Khan network acquired

specialist equipment and materials from companies
or intermediaries in many other countries, including
Spain, Italy, Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland
and the UK. In Asia, the network acquired specialist
balancing machines made by Hanbando Balance,
Inc., one of South Korea’s most prestigious manufacturers of balancing technology. A small South
Korean firm, De Young Engineering, purchased
four of these machines and exported them to Libya
in June %&&%. It is likely that Hanbando was unaware
of the final destination of its dual-use product.
The Japanese company Mitutoyo falsified export
documents for the specialised three-dimensional

81

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

KRL brochure distributed at 2000 Karachi arms fair (Andrew

KRL brochure (Andrew Koch/KRL)

Koch/KRL)

measuring machines (needed to build uraniumenrichment centrifuges with the necessary precision)
it sold to the network for the Libya programme.

Soured Pakistan–Libya connections
The Pakistani nuclear connection with Iran and
North Korea can be logically discerned, but the Khan
network’s cooperation with Libya is more puzzling,
unless it is viewed as a straight business deal. In the
case of neighbouring Iran, with whom Pakistan had
previously had a strong relationship, there were still
residual notions of ideological aﬃnity. In particular,
the strategic inclination of Beg, in his capacity as
army chief, towards Iran, and the significance of
his notion of strategic defiance could explain why
he might have had some sympathy for Iran’s quest
for nuclear weapons. In the case of North Korea,
the country-to-country strategic relationship was
based on defence cooperation that had existed since
the mid-'(*&s.83 In the case of Libya, there was no
ideological or military connection with Pakistan in
'((*, when the initial contact with KRL was made.
Nor had there been any government-to-government
connection, except during the early '(*&s when
Gadhafi and Bhu#o were close and Libya was interested not only in assisting Pakistan financially, but
also in providing natural uranium for the Pakistani

82

nuclear weapons eﬀort. Pakistan’s relations with
Libya had soured owing to Bhu#o’s hanging by Zia
in '(*(. The relationship was only revived in the
year %&&&, when Musharraf visited Libya. Unlike
with North Korea and Iran, there were no compelling reasons for Pakistan to engage in strategic
cooperation with Libya, nor were there any peculiar
personality inclinations. Nevertheless, the network
struck up a profitable proliferation business.
Libya proved to be the network’s biggest
customer, paying the network at least .'&&m,
according to the US.84 At a time when Pakistan had
become closely allied with the United States in the
a!ermath of the '' September %&&' a#acks, it is
illogical that the government of Pakistan would
have risked such a deal with a pariah country for
such a meagre sum. The amount also seems insignificant compared to what other Arab countries with
oil money were prepared to oﬀer, such as the ./bn
Saudi Arabia is said to have paid China for CSS-%
ballistic missiles in '()).

Other potential customers
Whether the A.Q. Khan network had other
customers has been a ma#er of intense interest to
foreign analysts and investigative agencies. KRL
openly advertised its enrichment wares, telling a

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

KRL brochure (Andrew Koch/KRL)

visitor at a Karachi trade fair in %&&&, for example,
that everything described in a glossy brochure
– all the components to operate a uranium enrichment plant and support services – were available
for purchase.85 Khan is reported to have visited at
least ') countries in the years before his %&&- arrest:
Afghanistan, Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Iran, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
North Korea, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Syria,
Tunisia and the UAE.86 The CIA monitors several
of these countries for indications that they might
harbour nuclear weapons ambitions, in part because
of their reported past links with Khan.87 Khan’s
repeated travel to Africa, sometimes accompanied
by KRL scientists and Pakistani army oﬃcers, also
raised questions. In trips to Nigeria, Niger, Mali
and Sudan he might have been discussing uranium
procurement, and, in Timbuktu, Mali, personal business related to his hotel investment there. Another
possibility is that he was prospecting for additional
customers. Some unconfirmed press reports have

an IISS strategic dossier

also claimed that Sudan was used as a
warehouse between '((( and %&&' to
store advanced dual-use engineering
equipment of European origin.88
Pakistan and Saudi Arabia have
an alliance in which it is understood
that Pakistan will come to the kingdom’s aid if it is under dire threat. To
firm up this alliance, Saudi Arabia
has reportedly provided financial support for Pakistan’s nuclear
programme, dating from the '()&s.89
In '((&, the Saudis were reportedly
tempted to seek Pakistani nuclear
warheads for the CSS-% missiles
they had acquired from China.90 In
May '(((, Saudi defence minister
Prince Sultan bin Abdulaziz made
a widely publicised visit to KRL
facilities, the first foreign leader to
do so. Pakistani oﬃcials assert that
Khan’s purpose was to market a
missile, not nuclear technology. The
Saudi defence minister reportedly
toured KRL again in August %&&%,
although by this time Khan had
been removed.91 Khan, for his part,
visited Saudi Arabia at least twice,
in November '((( and September
%&&&.92 It is common for Pakistani
oﬃcials to visit Saudi Arabia, for the
hajj and other legitimate reasons, but Khan’s visits
bear scrutiny. An investigation of his front oﬃce
in Dubai found records of telephone calls to Saudi
Arabia (whether for legitimate or illicit business
is unknown). According to US ambassador Chas
Freeman, King Fahd bin Abdulaziz told high-level
US oﬃcials on several occasions that Saudi Arabia
would need a nuclear deterrent in case Iran developed an atomic bomb.93 In %&&/, several sources
asserted, without firm evidence, that Pakistan and
Saudi Arabia agreed on a ‘nukes-for-oil’ barter,94
although in this case it would have been a strictly
government-to-government deal, not involving
the Khan network. There is no hard evidence of a
formal oﬀer or nuclear transfers from Pakistan to
Saudi Arabia, and the aforementioned visits may
just reflect the depth of the long-standing relationship between the two countries.
Reports of Khan discussing nuclear training
assistance with the United Arab Emirates were also
in a government-to-government context.95

83

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

Syria leads the list of countries suspected of
having acquired nuclear technology illicitly through
the Khan network, although the allegations have
not been substantiated. The CIA’s unclassified
report to Congress on WMD technology transfers in
%&&- expresses concern that expertise or technology
could have been transferred to Syria, but a#ributes
the intelligence only to reports in the Pakistani press
that ‘Pakistani investigators in late January %&&- said
they had “confirmation” … that A.Q. oﬀered nuclear
technology and hardware to Syria’. The original
press report adds that the deal never materialised.96
One pair of experts claims that Khan oﬀered nuclear
technology to Egypt, which turned it down.97 The
South African government’s indictment of Geiges
and Wisser for unauthorised import and export of
centrifuge equipment states that in '())–(& they
oﬀered various kinds of centrifuge technology to an
unnamed client, who ultimately declined the oﬀer
on the grounds that it was stolen property.
It is also possible that KRL exported nuclear
materials as well as centrifuge technology and
know-how to China, whose enrichment programme
reportedly suﬀered diﬃculties.98 Given the very close
relationship that exists between the two countries in
this and other fields, this would likely have been a
government-sanctioned activity, if it occurred.

Other unknowns
What happened with the rest of the nuclear equipment Libya ordered from the Khan network
but never received is another of the major questions remaining a!er the network was broken up.
Investigators who compared Libya’s records and
interviewed network members say critical components disappeared in %&&/, heightening suspicions
about an unidentified ‘fourth customer’. A!er the
interdiction of the BBC China made it clear that the
network had been compromised, those involved
began to destroy evidence and to dispose of stockpiled equipment. Rotors and other centrifuge
components, precision tools and parts for lathes
disappeared. Additionally, the network had an
unknown number of complete P-% centrifuges in
Dubai that it used as demonstration models. Two
were transferred to Libya, leaving at least a handful
unaccounted for. Although not in a complete state of
readiness, these would present a significant proliferation risk if they were to fall into the wrong hands.
Network intermediaries contacted by investigators
claimed that they destroyed the machines in order
to remove incriminating evidence, but it is more

84

BBC China, run aground in 2004 (Captain Nicholas Sloane)

likely that they simply hid or sold these valuable
commodities.99
A related question is whether other production
facilities for the Khan network remain undisclosed.
The -,&&& centrifuges that the US removed from Libya
in %&&- were missing their most important parts
– the fast-spinning rotors. Although the network
set up a workshop to produce the rotors in Libya, it
is questionable whether Tripoli could find enough
technicians with the specialised skills needed for the
assembly of these precision components. It remains
possible that the rotors were ordered from an as-yet
undisclosed factory elsewhere.
It is also unknown whether all members of the
Khan network have been identified and put under
at least some kind of law-enforcement watch.
Approximately ,& individuals may have been
actively involved in the network.100 Worldwide,
/) individuals are known to have been investigated.101 Certainly not everyone who assisted Khan
in Pakistan has been named. It is likely that some
of Khan’s associates in other countries are still at
large.
The unanswered question of greatest concern is
which other countries or non-state actors might also
have received copies of a nuclear weapon design
besides Libya. If the designs were given to Libya

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

simply to sweeten the deal for centrifuges, it is logical
to assume that Iran and North Korea, and any other
customers, would have been oﬀered copies as well.
The uranium-casting documents Iran received from
the Khan network have been described as ‘part of the
same recipe’ as Libya’s bomb design.102 Libya denies
having received any weaponisation information in
electronic form (in contrast to the centrifuge drawings it did receive on compact disks). However, the
bomb designs were reportedly digitised and copied
onto computer disks at the Khan oﬃce in Dubai.
According to testimony introduced in May %&&+ at
Lerch’s trial in Mannheim, Urs Tinner admi#ed to
having atomic bomb construction plans in his oﬃce
that he had received from Tahir. Lerch’s a#orney said
a customs agent memo quoted Tinner as saying that
the designs were original drawings from the '()&s
and that he had provided a copy to the IAEA.103
The Swiss and American authorities, as well as the
IAEA, have been trying to find out what other use
the Tinners may have made of the bomb designs,
including the nightmare scenario of whether they
sold any copies to terrorist groups.
The IAEA and Western intelligence agencies are
also still trying to confirm the extent and nature of
the assistance Khan gave Iran and North Korea.

A.Q. Khan’s personal motives and world
view
In the beginning, Khan was working only for
Pakistan’s national interest, which was to procure
nuclear weapons technology by any means. He was
encouraged to engage in parallel business dealings so that KRL could decrease its reliance on state
funding. He was not the first to benefit from the illicit
trade in destructive technologies, but he accelerated
the consolidation of the market and, in doing so, did
much to spread nuclear weapons technology. He
removed key obstacles in Pakistan’s successful quest
for nuclear weapons. Khan’s personal and Pakistan’s
national motives came into conflict as soon as Khan
was lured into lucrative clandestine dealings. In
spite of his position as a nationally revered figure,
Khan still harboured further personal ambition. His
problem was that the secretive nature of the Pakistani
nuclear programme meant his achievements had to
be kept hidden from the rest of the world.
Khan aspired to defy the West, which had
portrayed him as a villain and convicted him of
stealing centrifuge designs (in the Netherlands).
Khan felt his capabilities had been insulted. He may
also have felt a genuine sense of injustice and a victim

an IISS strategic dossier

of hypocrisy given the high number of Western
industrialists who were more than ready to do business with him. He had to prove he could deliver,
and outwit the West and its hurdles. Combined
with this was Khan’s personal anger and Pakistan’s
sense of having been victimised owing to India’s
nuclear test (France, Germany and Canada reneged
on contracts for nuclear facilities under intense US
pressure a!er India’s '(*- test, as noted in chapter
one). Khan reportedly told his interrogators that he
believed that ‘the emergence of more nuclear states
would ease Western a#ention on Pakistan’,104 an
explanation that rings true.
Khan said that he believed he was ‘helping the
Muslim cause’, but this is a less credible explanation
since the recipients of his assistance included North
Korea, a non-Muslim country. In fact, Khan was
not quite spreading the Islamic bomb, but acting
for those states that defied the West in their nuclear
pursuits, and more generally, in their foreign policies. Explaining his actions through this religious
dimension obscures the financial motivation that
appears to have been behind his dealings with Iran.
He may also have felt the need for revenge against
Zia, who in '()* had rebuked him (page (-). The
Iran case can be explained by simple market mechanisms: there was a long-standing demand from
Tehran, and there was now an available supply of
discarded P-' centrifuges. This provided an opportunity to expand the business of the network, giving
profits to all collaborators, who included his business partners as well as those within KRL and some
government oﬃcials who might have facilitated
or overlooked the deal. The oﬀer to Iraq in '((&
shows that there was no consistent political strategy
behind the network’s exports: it did not make sense
to sell simultaneously to Saddam Hussein and to his
arch-enemies in Tehran. Khan used the No-dong deal
with North Korea to retain his value in competition
with his PAEC rivals. As for Khan’s motive for Libya
– it seems that he simply wanted to make money
and to satisfy his ego. He felt hurt that his authority
had been called into question, and that he had been
removed from KRL, and thus wanted to prove that
he could deliver a nuclear capability anywhere in
the world through the network, for which the Libya
deal was an opportunity to ‘go global’, expanding
from its original Pakistani roots. In sum, a constellation of diﬀerent motivations explains the various
deals made by the Khan network, varying in importance over time and according to circumstances:
ego, profit, nationalism and Islamic identity.

85

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

Conclusions
For most of the deals it is hard to separate A.Q. Khan
the individual from the global network he led. But
neither were Khan and the network synonymous.
Although Khan was the deal-maker, the network
o!en appeared to act autonomously, driven as much
by his foreign business partners as by his own ambitions. By the time of the Libya deal, the network was
a ‘globalised supply chain’. Production capabilities
became widespread – with computer-controlled
lathes, components could be made almost anywhere
– and knowledge became diﬀuse.
The network’s ability to satisfy its customers
stems from its origins as a national procurement
enterprise. It was the experience gained from
working for the Pakistani programme that made
the network so eﬃcient when it turned to exports.
The story is more complex, however, than a mere
‘reversal of the flow’. Pakistan continued to import
components for its own programme, in a manner
that was largely insulated from the Khan network’s
exports. Also, Khan’s foreign-based partners were
not involved to the same degree in all cases: they
appear not to have been involved in the North
Korea case at all, except, for some perhaps, as direct
component suppliers. By contrast, Khan’s Swiss and
Dubai-based partners were apparently the first to be
involved in both the Iran and Libya cases.
Khan cannot be characterised strictly as either
a government representative or a businessman
acting independently. He was in fact both, in
varying degrees according to the circumstances.
The state’s complicity in his proliferation ranged
along a spectrum. At one end, his procurement for
Pakistan’s nuclear programme was state authorised, supported and funded, although he had great
autonomy in making his own purchases. Khan’s
purported discussions with the Saudis were almost
surely state authorised. At the other end of the spectrum, the Khan network’s sales to Libya of centrifuge
equipment produced in Malaysia, Turkey, Europe
and South Africa and transshipped in Dubai were
almost exclusively a private business transaction
beyond state control. The same is likely to be true
of his purported exploratory business trips to other
countries in Africa. The oﬀer to Iraq also appears
to have been a private venture by the network,
although the dearth of evidence makes it hard to
draw conclusions.
The Pakistani government should have known
what key oﬃcials, such as Khan, were up to in an
area so fundamental to Pakistan’s national secu-

86

rity and international reputation, and it is logical to
assume that the intelligence apparatus was aware of
more than Pakistan has ever let on. While knowledge of a transaction denotes complicity, however, it
does not necessarily imply authorisation. With Iran,
North Korea and Libya, Khan operated in the context
of on-going government-to-government cooperation in weapons programmes and exchanges that
either involved nuclear technology (in the case of
Iran), nuclear delivery systems (in the case of North
Korea), or nuclear materials (in the case of Libya).
In downplaying the damage caused by Khan’s
onward proliferation, Pakistani oﬃcials stress that
the centrifuge equipment he sold to Iran was used
and deficient, as was probably true of the equipment he transferred to North Korea, and, in the case
of Libya, that it was incomplete. None of these countries succeeded in constructing a nuclear weapon
from the technology they obtained from the Khan
network, although how close they got to a bomb as a
result of the transfers is a ma#er of some debate. The
nuclear device the North Koreans tested in October
%&&+ was based not on HEU but on the plutonium
they had separated from the spent fuel rods from
their research reactors. How much progress they
made in their Khan-assisted centrifuge-procurement programme is simply unknown. There is
no evidence that North Korea has any ability to
produce HEU; but neither was there any evidence
that it could produce UF+ before it emerged as the
most likely source of the UF+ that Libya obtained
from Khan. Iran has made the most widely documented progress in centrifuge technology with
Khan’s help, but as of the beginning of %&&*, it was
at least two or three years away from being able to
produce enough HEU for one nuclear weapon. Libya
produced no enriched uranium from the equipment
it imported, and, assuming it would have received
more help and the missing UF+ and centrifuge parts,
it was at least three or four years away from being
able to produce a weapon when Gadhafi renounced
the programme in December %&&/. Even then Libya
would have needed a suitable delivery vehicle.
The Khan network was not a nuclear weapons
‘Wal-Mart’, since its contributions to proliferation
concerned only – so far as is known today – centrifuge technology and, in one instance at least, a
weapon design. However, Khan’s nuclear sales had
other deleterious results. The transfer of enrichment
technology to North Korea precipitated the breakdown of the US–North Korea Agreed Framework
and Pyongyang’s resumption of its plutonium

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

President George W. Bush looks over equipment obtained from Libya’s former nuclear weapons programme at the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA, July 2004 (White House photo by Tina Hager)

Centrifuges from Libya on display at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA, March 2004 (Doug Mills/The New York Times/
Redux)

an IISS strategic dossier

87

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

programme and weapons test, with as-yet unknown
ripple eﬀects. Khan’s nuclear assistance to Iran
led to a further breakdown in the global nonproliferation regime and an international crisis over
a budding uranium enrichment capability that many
fear could escalate to armed conflict. If Gadhafi
had not made his wise choice in %&&/, Libya could
possibly be in possession of an atomic bomb by now,
a development that would probably have set one

or more of its neighbours on a similar path. These
scenarios, alarming as they are, only encompass the
known elements of Khan’s black market dealings.
By freely selling enrichment equipment and pu#ing
the designs on computer disks, Khan significantly
lowered the technical barriers to nuclear weapons
development. Who else might have access to the
nuclear technology he and his network proliferated
remains a haunting question.

Notes
William J. Broad, David E. Sanger and Raymond

1

2

13

%&&+. See also Steve Coll, Ghost Wars: The Secret History

Pakistani Built His Network’, New York Times, '%

of the CIA, Afghanistan, and Bin Laden, from the Soviet

February %&&-.

Invasion to September !", %""! (New York: Penguin Press,

Feroz Hassan Khan, ‘Nuclear Proliferation Motivations:

%&&-), pp. %%&–%'; Ma# Kelley, ‘Pakistan Threatened to

Lessons from Pakistan’, Nonproliferation Review, vol.

Give Iran Nukes’, Associated Press, %* February %&&-;

'/, no. /, November %&&+, p. ,''.

Douglas Frantz, ‘Pakistan’s Role in Scientist’s Nuclear

John Lancaster and Kamran Khan, ‘Pakistanis Say

3

Nuclear Scientists Aided Iran; Iran Nuclear Eﬀort Said

Traﬃcking Debated’, Los Angeles Times, '+ May %&&,.
14

Aided in Secret ‘)&s Deal’, Washington Post, %- January
%&&-.
4

A#ack’, Associated Press, '% May %&&+; Kathy Gannon,

Global Insecurity, and the Rise and Fall of the A.Q. Khan

‘Explosive Secrets from Pakistan’, Los Angeles Times, '+
May %&&,.
16

Bruno Tertrais, Pakistan’s Nuclear Exports: Was There a

Leonard S. Spector and Jacqueline R. Smith, Nuclear

State Strategy?, (Washington DC: The Non-Proliferation

Ambitions: The Spread of Nuclear Weapons !#$#–!##"

Policy Education Center, %& October %&&+), pp. ,–+,

(Boulder, CO: Westview Press, '((&), p. %'%; Kenneth

http://www.npec-web.org/Essays/%&&+'&%/-Tertrais-

Timmerman, Countdown to Crisis: The Coming Nuclear

Pakistan.pdf; David Rohde, ‘Nuclear Inquiry Skips

Showdown with Iran (New York: Crown Forum, %&&,),

Pakistani Army’, New York Times, %( January %&&-;

pp. /)–(.

Lancaster and Khan, ‘Pakistanis Say Nuclear Scientists

Stephen Fidler, ‘Fresh Clues on Smuggling Network

Aided

Could Li! Lid on Tehran’s Secret Nuclear Program’,

Pakistan’.

Financial Times, '% March %&&,; Dafna Linzer, ‘Iran Was

17

Iran’;

Gannon,

‘Explosive

Secrets

from

Coll, Ghost Wars, p. %%'. Lancaster and Khan,

Oﬀered Nuclear Parts: Secret Meeting in '()* May

‘Pakistanis Say Nuclear Scientists Aided Iran’; Udayan

Have Begun Program’, Washington Post, %* February

Namboodiri, ‘Dr. Khan’s Story: Thy Hand, Great Gen!’,

%&&,.

Pioneer, + February %&&-; Timmerman, Countdown to

‘Iranian Dissident Fires Ukraine, Iran Charges on

7

Kathy Gannon, ‘Iran Sought Advice in Pakistan on

Gordon Corera, Shopping for Bombs: Nuclear Proliferation,

+-.

6

Frantz, ‘Pakistan’s Role in Scientist’s Nuclear Traﬃcking
Debated’.

15

Network (New York: Oxford University Press, %&&+), p.
5

IISS communications, October %&&, and December

Bonner, ‘A Tale of Nuclear Proliferation: How a

Tehran’s Nuclear Program’, Agence France Presse, %+

Crisis, pp. '&,–).
18

Mubashir Zaida, ‘Scientist Claimed Nuclear Equipment

August %&&,.

was Old, Oﬃcials Say’, Los Angeles Times, '& February

8

Corera, Shopping for Bombs, p. +&.

%&&-; David Armstrong, ‘Friends Like These’, The New

9

Dafna Linzer, ‘Iran Was Oﬀered Nuclear Parts’.

10

IAEA, ‘Implementation of the NPT Safeguards

19

Corera, Shopping for Bombs, pp. *,–+.

Agreement

Iran’,

20

Ibid.

GOV/%&&+/',, %* February %&&+, p. ,, paras %& and %%.

21

Polis Diraja Malaysia, ‘Press Release by Inspector-

in

the

Islamic

Republic

of

Republic, ( November %&&-.

11

Corera, Shopping for Bombs, p. ++.

12

IAEA, ‘Implementation of the NPT Safeguards

Alleged Production of Components for Libya’s Uranium

Agreement

Enrichment Programme’, %& February %&&-, p. /: h#p://

in

the

Islamic

General of Police in Relation to Investigation on the
Republic

of

Iran’,

GOV/%&&,/)*, ') November %&&,, p. %, paras , and +.

88

www.rmp.gov.my/rmp&//&-&%%&scomi_eng.htm.

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

22

IAEA,

‘Implementation

of

the

NPT

Safeguards

39

Agreements in the Islamic Republic of Iran’, report
by the Director General to the Board of Governors,

'( November %&&,.
40

GOV/%&&//*,, '& November %&&/, Annex ', p. ), para -).
23

Mark Hibbs, ‘Customs Intelligence Data Suggest
DPRK Aimed At G-% TYPE Centrifuge’, NuclearFuel,

IAEA, ‘Implementation of the NPT Safeguards
Agreements in the Islamic Republic of Iran’,

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Report to Congress,

%+ May %&&/.
41

GOV/%&&-/)/, ', November %&&-, p. ), para /-.

Joby Warrick, ‘N. Korea Shops Stealthily for Nuclear
Arms Gear’, Washington Post, ', August %&&/.

24

IAEA, GOV/%&&-/)/, p. '', para -,.

25

‘Iran May Have Received Advanced Centrifuges:

Shimbun, '( July %&&-; Gary Thomas, ‘Former Prime

Diplomats’, Agence France Presse, %& Jan %&&+; Arms

Minister Says Pakistan Had Nuclear Capability Long

Control Association

Before Nuclear Tests’, Voice of America, / March %&&,,

‘Questions

42

Surround Iran’s

Nuclear Program’, Arms Control Association Fact
Sheets, / March %&&+, h#p://www.armscontrol.org/

h#p://www.voanews.com/english/%&&,-&/-&/-voa-.cfm.
43

factsheets/Iran-IAEA-Issues.asp; Dafna Linzer, ‘Strong

26

By March %&&/ India had conducted '+ known test
flights of Prithvi-' missiles. Zahid Hussain, ‘Missile Tests

Leads and Dead Ends in Nuclear Case Against Iran’,
Washington Post, ) February %&&+.

Eishiro Takeishi, ’We Bought Missile Technology’, Asahi

Raise Indo-Pakistan Fears’, The Times, %* March %&&/.
44

Joseph Bermudez, A History of Ballistic Missile Development

IISS, Iran’s Strategic Weapons Programmes: A Net

in the DPRK, Occasional Paper No. % (Monterey, CA:

Assessment (Abingdon: Routledge for IISS, %&&,), p. ,-,

Center for Nonproliferation Studies, Monterey Institute

Table 'A.

of International Studies, '(((), p. %).

27

Ibid.

28

Joseph F. Pilat, ‘Iraq and the Future of Nuclear

Program’, CRS Issue Brief for Congress, IB(''-'

Proliferation: The Roles of Inspections and Treaties’,

(Washington DC: Congressional Research Service,

45

Science, new series '%%,, no. ,&-(, + March '((%, p. '%%,.
29

‘Agencies Trace Some Iraqi URENCO Know-How to

updated %' February %&&+, pp. (–'&).
46

Pakistan Re-Export’, Nucleonics Week, %) November
For the IAEA’s English translation of the memo, see

vol. (, no. /, Fall–Winter %&&%, p. ''&.
47

David Albright and Corey Hinderstein, ’Documents

31

Kyodo News Service, %- August %&&,.
48

A.Q. Khan Research Laboratories, Kahuta: Twenty

February %&&-, h#p://www.isis-online.org/publications/

Years of Excellence and National Service’, in Dr. A.Q.

southasia/khan_memo_scan.pdf.

Khan on Science and Education (Lahore: Sang-E-Meel,

Pervez Musharraf, In the Line of Fire: A Memoir (New

'((*), pp. %%%–(.
49

David E. Sanger, ‘Pakistani Says He Saw North Korean
Bill Gertz, ‘Pyongyang Working to Make Fuel for

In the Line of Fire, pp. %)(–(&.
50

Nukes’, Washington Times, '' March '(((.
34

School, Monterey, CA, %&&,, p. +,.
51

and the Recommendations of the (/'' Commission:
US Policy Constraints and Options’, CRS Report to

Probe’; Clary, ‘The A.Q. Khan Network’, p. +/.
52

Sharon Squassoni, ‘Weapons of Mass Destruction:
Trade between North Korea and Pakistan’, RL/'(&&

Research Service, updated %- May %&&,, p. %%).

(Washington DC: Congressional Research Service, %)

Ibid., p. %(+.

36

David E. Sanger, ‘Pakistan Leader Confirms Nuclear

November %&&+), p.',.
53

Exports’, New York Times, '/ September %&&,.

38

Lancaster and Khan, ‘Musharraf Named in Nuclear

Congress, RL/%*-, (Washington DC: Congressional
35

37

Christopher O. Clary, ‘The A.Q. Khan Network: Causes
and Implications’, M.A. thesis, Naval Postgraduate

Richard P. Cronin, K. Alan Kronstadt and Sharon
Squassoni, ‘Pakistan’s Nuclear Proliferation Activities

Lancaster and Khan, ‘Musharraf Named in Nuclear
Probe’; ‘Re-Imposition of Sanctions Feared’; Musharraf,

Nuclear Devices’, New York Times, '/ April %&&-.
33

S. Shabbir Hussain and Mujahid Kamran (eds), ‘Dr.

Institute for Science and International Security, -

York: Free Press, %&&+), p. %)(.
32

Shahid-ur-Rehman and Aroosa Alam, ‘Musharraf
Says Khan Oﬀered Centrifuges, Designs To N. Korea’,

Indicate A.Q. Khan Oﬀered Nuclear Weapons Designs
to Iraq in '((&: Did He Approach Other Countries?’,

Gaurav Kampani, ‘Second Tier Proliferation: The Case
of Pakistan and North Korea’, Nonproliferation Review,

'((', pp. ', *–).
30

Larry A. Niksch, ‘North Korea’s Nuclear Weapons

Presentation by Pakistan Strategic Plans Division oﬃcials at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey,

‘Re-imposition of Sanctions Feared,’ Dawn, , February

CA, %* October %&&+.

%&&-.

54

Clary, ‘The A.Q. Khan Network’, p. +-.

Sanger, ‘Pakistani Says He Saw North Korean Nuclear

55

‘Arms Transfers to India and Pakistan, '((-–%&&-’,

Devices’.

an IISS strategic dossier

Stockholm International Peace Research Institute

89

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

56

(SIPRI) Arms Transfers Database, h#p://www.sipri.

Provided Plans’, Washington Post, ', Feb %&&-; David

org/contents/armstrad/atind_pakdata.html.

Albright and Corey Hinderstein, ‘Unraveling the

‘Pakistan’, SIPRI Military Expenditure Database,

A.Q. Khan and Future Proliferation Networks’,

h#p://www.sipri.org/contents/milap/milex/mex_data-

Washington Quarterly, vol. %), no. %, Spring %&&,, p.

base'.html.
57

''-.

For additional analysis of the explanation that Khan

76

acted alone, see Clary, pp. +/–+.

Douglas Frantz, ‘Vital Nuclear Parts are Missing’, Los
Angeles Times, %% April %&&,.

58

Corera, Shopping for Bombs, p. '(&.

59

IAEA, ‘Implementation of the NPT Safeguards

by the Rt Hon. the Lord Butler of Brockwell, KG

Agreement of the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab

GCB CVO, Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass

Jamahiriya’, GOV/%&&-///, %) May %&&-, p. %, para

Destruction, HC )() (London: The Stationery Oﬃce, '-

',.

July %&&-), h#p://www.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/

60

77

W.P.S. Sidhu, ‘Pakistan’s Bomb: A Quest for Credibility’,
Jane’s Intelligence Review, vol. ), no. +, June '((+, p.

61

Butler%%&Report.pdf, p. ').
78

Douglas Frantz and William C. Rempel, ‘New Find in

%*).

a Nuclear Network’, Los Angeles Times, %) November

Shyam Bhatia, Nuclear Rivals in the Middle East (New

%&&-; Albright and Hinderstein, ‘Unraveling the

York: Routledge, '())), pp. +-–*'; Spector and Smith,

A.Q. Khan and Future Proliferation Networks’, p.

Nuclear Ambitions, pp. '*,–),.
62

Report of a Commi#ee of Privy Councillors chaired

'').

Wyn Q. Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation: Stepping

79

Scomi Group Berhad, ‘SCOPE’s Press Statement on

Back from the Brink, Adelphi Paper /)& (London:

its Contract in Dubai’, news release, - February %&&-:

Routledge for IISS, %&&+), pp. /&–/'.

h#p://www.scomigroup.com.my/publish/&-news&&).

63

Ibid., p. /+.

shtml; Raymond Bonner and Wayne Arnold, ‘Business

64

IAEA, ‘Implementation of the NPT Safeguards

as Usual in Plant that Tenet Said was Shut’, New York

Agreement of the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya’, report by the Director General to the

Times, * February %&&-.
80

Board of Governors, GOV/%&&-/'%, %& February %&&-,
p. ,, para. %%.

Steve Coll, ‘The Atomic Emporium’, The New Yorker,
*–'- August %&&+.

81

Polis Diraja Malaysia, ‘Press Release by Inspector-

65

IAEA, GOV/%&&-///, Annex I, pp. ,-*.

General of Police’; David Albright and Corey

66

Clary, ‘The A.Q. Khan Network’, p. **.

Hinderstein, ‘Libya’s Gas Centrifuge Procurement:

67

Communication with investigative oﬃcial, Europe,

Much Remains Undiscovered, Institute for Science and

October %&&+; Corera, Shopping for Bombs, pp. %/+–*.

International Security (ISIS) ’ISIS Issue Brief, ' March,

Glenn Kessler and Dafna Linzer, ‘Nuclear Evidence

%&&-:

Could Point to Pakistan’, Washington Post, / February

cent_procure.html; David Albright, ‘International

%&&,.

Smuggling Networks: Weapons of Mass Destruction

Ibid.; Glenn Kessler, ‘North Korea May Have Sent

Counterproliferation Initiatives’, statement to the

Libya Nuclear Material, US Tells Allies’, Washington

Senate Commi#ee on Government Aﬀairs, %/ June

68

69

Post, % February %&&,.
70

71

%&&-.

Kessler and Linzer, ‘Nuclear Evidence Could Point to

82

73

William J. Broad and David E. Sanger, ‘A!er Ending

Pakistan’.

Arms Program, Libya Receives a Surprise’, New York

David E. Sanger and William J. Broad, ‘Tests Said to

Times, %( May %&&-; Ian Traynor, ‘Western Agents Let

Tie Deal on Uranium to North Korea’, New York Times,

Nuclear Equipment Slip Past to Libya’, Guardian, %(

% February %&&,.
72

h#p://www.isis-online.org/publications/libya/

May %&&-.

Kessler and Linzer, ‘Nuclear Evidence Could Point to

83

Clary, ‘The A.Q. Khan Network’, p. )&.

Pakistan’.

84

Ma# Kelley, ‘Nuclear Weapons Cost Libya .'&&

William J. Broad, ‘Libya’s Crude Bomb Design
Eases Western Experts’ Fears’, New York Times, (

Million’, Associated Press, '+ March %&&-.
85

Andrew Koch, ‘AQ Khan Network: Case Closed’, testi-

February %&&-; Douglas Frantz, ‘A High-Risk Nuclear

mony to Subcommi#ee on International Terrorism and

Stakeout’, Los Angeles Times, %* February %&&,; IAEA,

Nonproliferation of the House International Relations

GOV/%&&-///, Annex I, p. *.

Commi#ee, %, May %&&+, pp. '*–'(.

74

Bowen, Libya and Nuclear Proliferation, p. -/.

75

Joby Warrick and Peter Slevin, ‘Libyan Arms Designs

Secrets Emerge in Khan Inquiry, More Are Suspected’,

Traced Back to China; Pakistanis Resold Chinese-

New York Times, %+ December %&&-.

90

86

William J. Broad and David E. Sanger, ‘As Nuclear

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

A.Q. Khan and onward proliferation from Pakistan

87

88

John D. Negroponte, ‘Annual Threat Assessment of

through /' December %&&-’, May %&&+, p. ,; Kamran

the Director of National Intelligence’, Senate Select

Khan, ‘Pakistanis Exploited Nuclear Network; Iran,

Commi#ee on Intelligence, '' January %&&*.

Libya Aided Via Black Market, Investigation Finds’,

Ian Traynor and Ian Cobain, ‘Clandestine Nuclear
Deals Traced to Sudan’, Guardian, , January %&&+.

89

‘Saudi Nuclear Pact’, Washington Post, ') January '()';
‘Mohammed Al-Khilewi: Saudi Arabia is Trying to

90

Washington Post, %) January %&&-.
97

and Future Proliferation Networks’, p. ''/.
98

See David Albright and Mark Hibbs, ‘Pakistan’s Bomb:

Kill Me’, Middle East Quarterly, vol. ,, no. /, September

Out of the Closet’, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, vol.

'((), p. *-.

-), no. +, July–August '((%; and Corera, Shopping for

Mansoor Ijaz, ‘Pakistan’s Nuclear Metastasis: How
Widespread is the Cancer?’, The Weekly Standard, )

Bombs, p. -,.
99

January %&&-; Ronen Bergman, ‘El-Sulayil Missile Base
– Saudi Desert’, Yediot Ahronot, %* March %&&%, h#p://

91

Albright and Hinderstein, ’Unraveling the A.Q. Khan

IISS interview with David Albright, January %&&*.
Frantz, ‘Vital Nuclear Parts Missing’.

100

David Albright, ‘A.Q. Khan Network: The Case is

www.globalsecurity.org/org/news/%&&%/&%&/%*-saudi.

Not Closed’, testimony before the Subcommi#ee on

htm.

International Terrorism and Nonproliferation of the House

Selig S. Harrison, ‘US Must Clamp Down on Pakistan
Nuke Dealing’, San José Mercury News, /& May %&&/.

International Relations Commi#ee, %, May %&&+, p. ).
101

Kenley Butler, Sammy Salema and Leonard S.

92

Tertrais, ‘Pakistan’s Nuclear Exports’, p. ''.

Spector, ‘Where is the Justice?’, Bulletin of the Atomic

93

Harrison, ‘US Must Clamp Down on Pakistan Nuke

Scientists, vol. +%, no. +, November–December %&&+,

Dealing’. However, according to Harrison, Ambassador

pp. %,–/-. As of the publication date, the authors said

Freeman understood at that time that ‘the King envis-

five individuals had been convicted, '- were known

aged a US nuclear umbrella’.

to be under investigation, and at least '( others had

David R. Sands, ‘Israeli General Says Saudis Seek to

been cleared of wrongdoing, released from detention

94

Buy Nukes’, Washington Times, %/ October %&&/; Uri
Dan, ‘Israeli: Saudis Trying to Buy Nuke Warheads’,

or pardoned.
102

New York Post, %% October %&&/; Arnaud de Borchgrave,

Trail of Iran’s Nuclear Secrets’, Daily Telegraph, %%

‘Pakistan–Saudi Trade Nuke Tech for Oil’, United Press
International, %& October %&&/.
95

March %&&+.
103

‘Government Oﬀers UAE Nuclear Training But Not
‘Unclassified Report to Congress on the Acquisition of

Wolfgang Frey, ‘Angeklagter im Atomprozess schwer
belastet’ (‘Defendant in Atom case severely incrimi-

Atomic Bomb on Pla#er’, Jasarat, %+ May '(((.
96

Anton La Guardia, ‘Tailor’s Bag that Put West on the

nated’), Der Spiegel, '* May %&&+.
104

David Rohde and David E. Sanger, ‘Key Pakistani

Technology Relating to Weapons of Mass Destruction

is Said to Admit Atom Transfers’, New York Times, %

and Advanced Conventional Munitions, ' January

February %&&-.

an IISS strategic dossier

91

92

Nuclear Black Markets: Pakistan, A.Q. Khan and the rise of proliferation networks

