# Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

- **Author:** James Kwak
- **Published in:** Preventing Regulatory Capture: Special Interest Influence and How to Limit It (Chapter 4)
- **Editors:** Daniel Carpenter & David A. Moss
- **Publisher:** Cambridge University Press, 2014
- **Source URL:** https://tobinproject.org/sites/default/files/assets/Kwak%20-%20Cultural%20Capture%20and%20the%20Financial%20Crisis.pdf
- **Access:** Freely available PDF from the Tobin Project

---

Preventing Regulatory Capture
Special Interest Influence and How to Limit It

Edited by
DANIEL CARPENTER
Harvard University

DAVID A. MOSS
Harvard University

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

32 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10013-2473, USA
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107646704

C The Tobin Project 2014

This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2014
Printed in the United States of America
A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Preventing regulatory capture : special interest influence and how to limit it / [edited by] Daniel
Carpenter, Harvard University, David A. Moss, Harvard University.
pages cm
Includes index.
ISBN 978-1-107-03608-6 (hardback) – ISBN 978-1-107-64670-4 (pbk.)
1. Deregulation – United States. 2. Trade regulation – United States. 3. Interest groups –
United States. I. Carpenter, Daniel P., 1967– II. Moss, David A., 1964–
HD3616.U63P74 2013
338.973–dc23
2013008596
ISBN 978-1-107-03608-6 Hardback
ISBN 978-1-107-64670-4 Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLs for
external or third-party Internet Web sites referred to in this publication and does not guarantee
that any content on such Web sites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

4

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis
James Kwak1

In 1992, Barbara Smiley, a resident of California, sued Citibank, alleging that it violated California law by charging late fees to her credit card
account.2 During the litigation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) – the primary regulator for national banks such as Citibank –
issued a proposed regulation specifying that late fees were “interest”3 ; under
federal law,4 this meant that Citibank was bound solely by the law of the
state where its credit card subsidiary was situated – South Dakota.5 When
the case was appealed to the Supreme Court, twenty-five states and several consumer organizations signed onto briefs supporting Smiley; fifteen
states, the American Bankers Association, and the OCC supported Citibank.
The Supreme Court ruled for Citibank, deferring to the OCC.6 The Court
acknowledged but discarded the fact that the OCC seemed to have issued
the regulation because of the ongoing litigation,7 endorsing the ability of a
federal agency to issue regulations to sway pending litigation in favor of the
companies it supervised.

1

Associate Professor, University of Connecticut School of Law. I would like to thank Christine Jolls, the other authors represented in this volume, and two anonymous reviewers for
helpful suggestions.
2
Smiley v. Citi bank (South Dakota), N.A., 517 U.S. 735, 738 (1996).
3
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, “Interpretive Rulings,” 60 Fed. Reg. 11924,
11929 (1995).
4
Section 85 of the National Bank Act, 12 U.S.C. § 85, interpreted by Marquette National
Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Service Corp., 439 U.S. 299 (1978).
5
Citibank located its credit card issuing bank in South Dakota because of favorable regulation offered by that state. Robin Stein, “The Ascendancy of the Credit Card Industry,” Frontline, November 23, 2004. Available at http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/
shows/credit/more/rise.html.
6
Smiley, 517 U.S. at 739.
7
Ibid., 741.

71
Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

72

James Kwak

The OCC’s intervention in Smiley v. Citibank was just one part of a
sweeping campaign to lift constraints on national banks, allowing them
to enter new businesses while blocking efforts by states to rein them in.8
The OCC, in turn, was just one of several federal agencies that spent most
of the past two decades fulfilling the wishes of different segments of the
financial sector. The Federal Reserve issued a series of decisions enabling
banks to expand into the securities business9 and later declined to enforce
consumer protection statutes against the nonbank subsidiaries of bank
holding companies.10 All four major banking agencies (the Federal Reserve,
the OCC, the Office of Thrift Supervision [OTS], and the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation [FDIC]) relaxed the capital requirements governing
structured financial products, enabling banks to ramp up their securitization businesses without setting aside large amounts of capital.11 The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) allowed major investment banks to
use their internal models to calculate their net capital, giving them greater
flexibility to effectively increase their leverage;12 in exchange, the banks gave
the SEC new oversight powers that went essentially unused.13 The OTS
was perhaps the worst offender, seemingly engaging in blatant efforts to
attract fee-paying regulatory “customers” with the promise of lax regulation.14
Several of these policies were vigorously contested at the time, as was the
OCC’s position in Smiley. In 2003, when the OCC issued two proposed rules
that would expand federal preemption of state law, it received more than
2,700 comment letters. The vast majority of the non-form letters opposed
the proposed rules, including a majority of letters from every category of
8

Steven P. Croley, “Public Interested Regulation,” Florida State University Law Review 28
(Fall 2000): 75–84; Adam J. Levitin, “Hydraulic Regulation: Regulating Credit Markets
Upstream,” Yale Journal on Regulation 26 (Summer 2009): 152–5.
9
Simon Kwan, “Cracking the Glass-Steagall Barriers,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Letter 97–08, March 21, 1997.
10
Binyamin Appelbaum, “Fed Held Back as Evidence Mounted on Subprime Loan Abuses,”
Washington Post, September 27, 2009. Available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/
wp-dyn/content/article/2009/09/26/AR2009092602706.html.
11
Corine Hegland, “Why It Failed,” National Journal, April 11, 2009, 12–20.
12
Securities and Exchange Commission, “Final Rule: Alternative Net Capital Requirements
for Broker-Dealers That Are Part of Consolidated Supervised Entities,” 69 Fed. Reg. 34428
(2004).
13
SEC Office of Inspector General, SEC’s Oversight of Bear Stearns and Related Entities: The
Consolidated Supervised Entity Program, September 25, 2008.
14
Binyamin Appelbaum and Ellen Nakashima, “Banking Regulator Played Advocate Over
Enforcer,” Washington Post, November 23, 2008. Available at http://www.washingtonpost
.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/11/22/AR2008112202213.html.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

73

respondent except “bank industry [other].”15 The OCC made some changes
in the final rule, but refused to budge on the core preemption issue.16 Many
of these policies also contributed to the financial crisis that began in 2007.
Deregulation of financial markets enabled financial institutions to spawn
new types of mortgages that fueled the housing bubble, manufacture enormous volumes of securities that became toxic when the bubble collapsed,
magnify and concentrate risk through the use of customized derivatives, and
lever up with short-term debt. Policies that were favored by the financial
sector because they increased profits in the short run ended up making the
financial system more fragile and imposing widespread losses on society.
CAPTURE?

At first glance, federal regulation of the financial system over the past two
decades seems like a case of regulatory capture, in which agencies do the
bidding of industry without regard for the public good. However, there is
a problem with this picture, which can be identified by focusing on the
definition of capture in this volume (slightly shortened): “a process by
which regulation . . . is consistently or repeatedly directed away from the
public interest and toward the interests of the regulated industry by the
intent and action of the industry itself.”
Most importantly, it is difficult to prove that the deregulatory policies
pursued by these agencies were clearly not in the public interest as knowable
at the time. In retrospect, given the economic and fiscal consequences of the
financial crisis, it seems obvious that policies that increased the likelihood or
severity of the crisis were not in the public interest. However, two defenses
can be made against this indictment. First, bad outcomes are not proof of bad
policy, because the outcomes of policies are probabilistic. It is theoretically
possible that the recent financial crisis was a fluke accident17 and that the true
expected impact of these policies on the public interest was positive – just
as a football team’s failure to gain a first down on fourth-and-one does not
mean that going for a first down was a bad decision.18 Second, many agency
15

Government Accountability Office, OCC Preemption Rulemaking: Opportunities Existed
to Enhance the Consultative Efforts and Better Document the Rulemaking Process, October
2005, 30–6.
16
Ibid., 36–40.
17
For the record, I am highly skeptical of the “once-in-a-century flood” theory of the financial
crisis.
18
Indeed, Romer shows that teams should go for a first down on fourth-and-one regardless
of field position, at least early in a game. David Romer, “Do Firms Maximize? Evidence
from Professional Football,” Journal of Political Economy 114, no. 2 (April 2006): 352–3.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

74

James Kwak

policies that were controversial at the time (or have become controversial
with hindsight) were within the range of plausible disagreement about the
public interest. In Smiley, even if there are strong criticisms to be made of a
credit card business model that relies on keeping people in debt and harvesting fees from them,19 one can still argue that freeing banks from having to
comply with fifty states’ fee restrictions will increase efficiency and thereby
reduce the cost of credit. In general, financial deregulation was justified by
plausible arguments that unregulated markets would allocate capital more
efficiently, both reducing the cost of credit and increasing its availability.20
Strong arguments can still be made that several of these deregulatory
actions were in fact against the public interest. For example, the Federal
Reserve’s decision not to undertake consumer protection examinations of
nonbank mortgage lenders seems to contradict the intent of the Home
Ownership and Equity Protection Act of 1994, the scope of which is defined
by the set of mortgages falling under its terms, not the set of institutions
originating those mortgages.21 Agencies’ failures to enforce their own rules
against institutions they regulated – even, in the case of the OTS, allowing
IndyMac Bancorp to backdate its capital infusions to appear better capitalized than it actually was and avoid additional FDIC restrictions22 – are
also hard to defend as being in the public interest. However, it is difficult
to make a blanket statement that the public interest was sufficiently well
defined for financial deregulation to be categorically labeled as against the
public interest.23
Even if we cannot unambiguously say that the financial sector captured
its regulatory agencies, however, that should not end our inquiry. There is
a range of possibilities ranging from a “bad” agency that consciously favors
industry over a clearly identifiable public interest to a “good” agency that
seeks only to identify and serve the general welfare. There is also a range of
outcomes from strong capture, which produces regulation that harms the
public interest, to weak capture, which reduces but does not eliminate the
19

Ronald J. Mann, “Bankruptcy Reform and the ‘Sweat Box’ of Credit Card Debt,” University
of Illinois Law Review 375 (2007): 384–92.
20
For example, the argument goes, unlimited late fees allow a bank to compensate itself for
the specific risk of late payment; otherwise it would have to compensate itself by increasing
the interest rate, which would affect all customers.
21
Public Law 103–325 §§ 152, 156 (1994).
22
Michael M. Phillips and Jessica Holzer, “Regulator Let IndyMac Backdate Infusion,”
Wall Street Journal, December 23, 2008. Available at http://online.wsj.com/article/
SB122998621544328009.html.
23
In some cases, it is also arguable that deregulatory policies were not the result of the “intent
and action” of the financial sector. For example, returning to Smiley, the OCC might have
reached its conclusion as a matter of pure statutory interpretation, leaving aside questions
of the public interest.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

75

benefits of regulation. Financial regulation, where different interest groups
advance competing plausible conceptions of the public interest, is more
likely to be the rule than the exception in regulatory policy. In this context,
the key question is why agency policies generally ended up favoring the
financial sector, with the outcomes we know too well – in other words, what
mechanisms of influence enabled regulated industry to get its way.
MECHANISMS OF INFLUENCE

The motive force in traditional theories of capture is material self-interest.24
According to Levine and Forrence,25 capture exists when regulators26 are
motivated by self-interest and therefore select policies that would not gain
the support of an informed public. Capture can be produced by several
mechanisms in addition to bribes. Regulatory agencies may be dependent
for funds on the firms they regulate; firms can provide support to legislators,
who then apply pressure to agencies through oversight committees; or
individual regulators may be attracted by higher paying jobs in the industry
they oversee.
Traditional capture theory is almost certainly incomplete. In practice,
general interests do sometimes win out over special interests.27 Furthermore, it would be shocking if regulators did not sometimes attempt to
advance their ideological interests – what they think is right – rather than
their material self-interest. Even if regulators are not motivated solely by
their conception of the public interest, regulatory discretion is still not
traded for material gain in a transparent market. Instead, the complexities
of politics imply that sometimes agencies are compelled to follow the general
interest, sometimes industry exercises control over regulators, and sometimes regulators have the space to act on ideological grounds.28 Croley29 has
argued that the structure of the administrative process makes it possible for
24

For summaries, see Michael E. Levine and Jennifer L. Forrence, “Regulatory Capture,
Public Interest, and the Public Agenda: Toward a Synthesis,” Journal of Law, Economics,
and Organization 6 (1990): 169–70; Steven P. Croley, “Public Interested Regulation,”
Florida State University Law Review 28 (Fall 2000): 9–15; and Nicholas Bagley and Richard
L. Revesz, “Centralized Oversight of the Regulatory State,” Columbia Law Review 106
(October 2006): 1284–85.
25
Levine and Forrence, “Regulatory Capture, Public Interest, and the Public Agenda: Toward
a Synthesis,” 178.
26
Although this chapter focuses on administrative agencies, the concepts discussed could
also apply to other governmental actors.
27
Levine and Forrence, “Regulatory Capture, Public Interest, and the Public Agenda,” 172;
Croley, “Public Interested Regulation,” 4.
28
Levine and Forrence, “Regulatory Capture, Public Interest, and the Public Agenda,” 171–2.
29
Croley, “Public Interested Regulation,” 106.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

76

James Kwak

regulators to escape the shadow of Congress or special interests and act in
what they think is the public interest.30
So, it seems, regulators can either cash in or do what they think is right.
However, this is still not a satisfying understanding of regulatory behavior
and outcomes. There is a spectrum of behavior that ranges from outright
corruption to nobly serving the public. People’s actions are the product
of many different factors, and mixes of motivations are certainly possible.
In addition, to the extent that we believe that regulators act according to
their ideological beliefs, this only raises the question of how those beliefs
are formed – specifically, how the administrative process exposes regulators to a particular set of influences that can color their beliefs. Both the
capture model and the public interest model of regulatory action assume
that regulators are rational actors: either they maximize their material selfinterest or they maximize their consciously held policy interests. However,
there is another possibility: that regulators are susceptible to nonrational
forms of influence, which interest groups can exploit to achieve the practical
equivalent of capture – favorable policy outcomes.
It is uncontroversial that interest groups should attempt to convince
regulators of their policy positions using the familiar tools of argument and
evidence. Interest groups, however, have other channels of influence they can
exploit to shape the way regulators think about the problems they are tasked
with solving. Most fundamentally, regulators are human beings and are
therefore subject to the same sets of cognitive shortcomings as other human
beings. This implies that they make decisions for reasons other than their
material self-interest or their consciously held policy beliefs. Even when they
do act according to their policy beliefs, those beliefs depend on the peculiar
ways in which people develop their ideological preferences. Policy outcomes,
therefore, can depend not solely on regulators’ material self-interest, their
preexisting policy positions, and the process of rational debate, but also on
the nonrational pressures that arise out of the administrative process.
This has been a growing area of inquiry as either a critique or an offshoot
of capture theory.31 Rachlinski and Farina32 drew on cognitive psychology
and behavioral economics to construct a model of governmental error that
30

See also Levine and Forrence, “Regulatory Capture, Public Interest, and the Public Agenda,”
185.
31
In a sense, it is also a very old area of inquiry, dating back at least to Alexis de Tocqueville,
who attributed America’s “singular paucity of distinguished political characters” to the
social pressures to conform to majority opinion. Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in
America, Translated by Henry Reeve (New York: George Dearborn & Co., 1838), 244–7.
32
Jeffrey J. Rachlinski and Cynthia R. Farina, “Cognitive Psychology and Optimal Government Design,” Cornell Law Review 87 (January 2002): 571–82.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

77

is opposed to the traditional capture model. Choi and Pritchard33 similarly identified a set of behavioral biases that may partially explain the
shortcomings of the SEC. In both cases, the authors suggested irrational
decision-making processes rather than material self-interest as an explanation of suboptimal policies. At the same time, nonrational influences have
also been framed as causes of capture. According to Hanson and Yosifon,34
“[b]eneath the surface of behavior, the interior situation of relevant actors
is also subject to capture.”35 More narrowly, Wagner36 has identified “information capture,” in which interest groups take advantage of administrative
law – in particular, the requirement that agencies take all submissions into
account – to inundate regulators with complex information to obtain favorable policy outcomes. An agency acting in good faith might “participate in a
capture dynamic,” according to Bagley, because “the agency might depend
on information from the affected entities and lack the means or ability to
review that information skeptically. Or the agency might come to see the
world the way that its regulated entities do.”37 Davidoff has discussed “social
capture,” in which regulators’ decisions are influenced by the composition
of their social networks: “These men and women may believe they are doing
their best, but their worldview is affected by the people they interact with.”38
The recent financial crisis has provided new motivation for nonmaterialist accounts of capture. The financial sector (and the “Wall Street”
investment banks and universal banks in particular) seems to have gained
the cooperation of the federal regulatory agencies, not simply by appealing to material self-interest, but also by convincing them that financial
33

Stephen J. Choi and A.C. Pritchard, “Behavioral Economics and the SEC,” Stanford Law
Review 56 (October 2003): 20–36.
34
Jon D. Hanson and David G. Yosifon, “The Situation: An Introduction to the Situational
Character, Critical Realism, Power Economics, and Deep Capture,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 152 (November 2003): 14.
35
Hanson and Yosifon’s concept of “deep capture” applies to society in general, not just
government actors.
36
Wendy Wagner, “Administrative Law, Filter Failure, and Information Capture,” Duke Law
Journal 59 (April 2010): 1321.
37
Nicholas Bagley. “Agency Hygiene.” Texas Law Review See Also 89 (November 20, 2010):
1–14. Available at http://www.texaslrev.com/seealso/vol/89/responses/bagley. See A.C.
Pritchard, “The SEC at 70: Time for Retirement?” Notre Dame Law Review 80 (March
2005): 1073–1102. For example, Pritchard wrote (2005, p. 1089), “the financial services
industry has considerable influence over the information that the SEC receives as it undertakes its rulemaking responsibilities. The result has been a system of securities regulation
that largely benefits the big players in the securities industry.”
38
Steven M. Davidoff. “The Government’s Elite and Regulatory Capture.” DealBook,
New York Times, June 11, 2010. Available at http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2010/06/11/
the-governments-elite-and-regulatory-capture. See p. 39.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

78

James Kwak

deregulation was in the public interest. This is not controversial in itself,
but their positions were often contested at the time and, with hindsight,
appear to have been catastrophically wrong. The question, then, is how
regulators could have been so wrong, especially in the direction that favored
the regulated industry. Joseph Stiglitz answered the question in terms of
proximity: “I think that mindsets can be shaped by people you associate
with, and you come to think that what’s good for Wall Street is good for
America.”39 Needham described cognitive biases as a potential contributor
to the Federal Reserve’s decision not to examine nonbank mortgage originators during the housing bubble.40 Buiter partially explained the response
of the Federal Reserve to the growing panic of 2007–2008 by referring to
“cognitive regulatory capture”: “those in charge of the relevant state entity
internalising, as if by osmosis, the objectives, interests and perception of
reality of the vested interest they are meant to regulate.”41 Adair Turner,42
chair of the U.K. Financial Services Authority, also used the phrase “cognitive capture” to describe the tendency of financial regulators to engage
in “problem solving with the [regulated] institution” rather than enforcing
existing rules. Baxter43 has described the financial sector’s influence over
regulation as an example of the “deep capture” described by Hanson and
Yosifon.44 Johnson and I argued that the idea that unfettered financial activity is always good for society became a form of “cultural capital” – an idea
that people adopt in part because of the prestige it confers.45
There seems to be a widespread intuition that regulated industry can
shape policy outcomes through influences other than material incentives
and rational debate. This chapter discusses how and why this might happen:
39

Jo Becker and Gretchen Morgenson, “Geithner, Member and Overseer of Finance
Club,” New York Times, April 26, 2009. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/
27/business/27geithner.html.
40
Carol A. Needham. “Listening to Cassandra: The Difficult of Recognizing Risks and Taking
Action.” Fordham Law Review 78 (April 2010): 2347–2355.
41
Willem Buiter. “Central Banks and Financial Crises.” In Maintaining Stability in a Changing
Financial System (proceedings of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy
Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 21–23, 2008), 601.
42
Adair Turner, interview with Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission Staff, November 30,
2010. Audiotape available at http://fcic.law.stanford.edu/interviews/view/102.
43
Lawrence G. Baxter. “Capture in Financial Regulation: Can We Redirect It Toward the
Common Good?” Cornell Journal of Law and Public Policy 21, no. 1 (Fall 2011): 175–
200.
44
In Baxter’s view, “the language of regulation is shaped by the common backgrounds, education, experience and intermingling of the more powerful players in the policy formation
process.”
45
Simon Johnson and James Kwak, 13 Bankers: The Wall Street Takeover and the Next
Financial Meltdown (New York: Pantheon, 2010), 104–5.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

79

why regulators’ perspectives and actions might be shaded by the nature of
their interactions with interest groups, not just the substantive content of
those interactions. In particular, I focus on three mechanisms of influence
that are likely to operate in the regulatory context: group identification,
status, and relationship networks.
I use the label cultural capture for this phenomenon: cultural because it
operates through a set of shared but not explicitly stated understandings
about the world; capture because it can produce the same outcome as
traditional capture – regulatory actions that serve the ends of industry.
Cultural capture, as I describe it, however, is not necessarily capture as
strictly defined in this volume. It is one reason why capture can occur: an
industry might consciously set out to induce its regulators to identify with
industry members and their interests, and those regulators might make
decisions because their conception of the public interest has been colonized
by industry. The mechanisms of cultural capture, however, are also relevant
in less clear-cut situations in which the industry position is arguably a
plausible reading of the public interest. If we think of cultural capture as a
strategy that interest groups can use to influence regulation, it is available
both to sway regulators away from a clearly identifiable public interest and
when there is a contest between multiple possible policies, none of which
is clearly superior to any other for the public. In the terms used by Yackee
in this volume (see Chapter 11), cultural capture may help an industry
exert influence on agency actions, but that influence may fall short of being
controlling. Cultural capture also implies that it is not enough from a public
policy standpoint simply to prevent traditional capture based on material
self-interest. The alternative to outright capture is not necessarily a world
in which regulators follow the public interest, either in the abstract or as
they perceive it. Instead, that perception is shaped by a host of nonrational
factors, many of which can be manipulated by interest groups and not by
the free competition of ideas and evidence.
Cultural capture, then, is a channel through which capture can occur in
parallel to the traditional materialist channel. It contributes to the ongoing
contest between rival ideological systems, which helps to shape the belief
systems of governmental actors. Unfortunately, this means that in most cases
it will be impossible to prove that cultural capture is the determining factor
behind regulatory outcomes. Traditional capture is already hard enough to
identify, because policymakers invariably cite some justifications other than
self-interest for their actions. Cultural capture, if anything, is even harder to
identify empirically, because there are always multiple explanations for why
someone forms the beliefs she has; in practice, nonrational influences will

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

80

James Kwak

ease the adoption and strengthen the grip of beliefs that have plausible rational justifications. In the psychology and economics literatures, the roles of
different types of motivations can be isolated using laboratory or field experiments, but this is unlikely to be practical in the case of regulatory policy.
Still, cultural capture should not be written off on the grounds of nontestability. If we ignore the possibility that regulators hold beliefs or make
decisions in part because of nonrational factors, we are both ignoring common sense and constraining the solution space for administrative policy.46
That is, if the only problem we guard against is material self-interest, we will
have a regulatory process protected from bribery but not from the other
influences wielded by motivated interest groups. We should not doubt that
sophisticated interest groups are doing what they can to achieve cultural
capture wherever possible, because it is certainly in their interests. It is possible that our current practices are ideal – that we should have rules limiting
bribery and its close relatives, but we should not worry about other forms
of influence – but if so, that is a conclusion we should reach consciously,
not by default.
HOW CULTURAL CAPTURE WORKS

In this section, I describe three mechanisms by which regulated industry is
able to shape regulators’ beliefs and actions – mechanisms that should not
work if regulators are rational beings devoted to their self-interest or if they
form their policy preferences rationally. They are:
r Identity: Regulators are more likely to adopt positions advanced by

people whom they perceive as being in their in-group.

r Status: Regulators are more likely to adopt positions advanced by

people whom they perceive to be of higher status in social, economic,
intellectual, or other terms.
r Relationships: Regulators are more likely to adopt positions advanced
by people who are in their social networks.
These mechanisms can overlap in practice, but they are conceptually distinct. For example, if I am an agency employee meeting with a lawyer who
is representing a Wall Street investment bank, I may feel she is in my ingroup because we went to the same law school, I may feel she is of higher
status because she makes several times as much money as I do, and we
46

In Rachlinski and Farina, “Cognitive Psychology and Optimal Government Design.” 593–
606, for example, Rachlinski and Farina argued that governmental decision-making processes should be informed by what we know about cognitive biases.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

81

may send our children to the same schools and therefore be in the same
social networks. However, each of these factors can also exist on its own.
I might identify strongly as a civil servant and against the private interests
she represents, but we might still send our children to the same schools,
and I might see her regularly for those reasons. Furthermore, each type of
influence relies on different psychological mechanisms and will therefore
be important in different contexts. These are also factors that we should
expect to be at work in interactions between regulators and regulated and
that therefore have particular implications for administrative regulation.

Identity
Considerable psychological and economic research indicates that group
identity matters, and not only because in helping my own group I help
myself as a member of that group. Identification with a group has several
effects on behavior that go beyond material self-interest. People seem to
gain utility from behaving in conformity with their group identities. When
multiple group identities are available to a person, her behavior will be
influenced by the identity that she selects, whether that selection is conscious
or unconscious.
A standard procedure in psychology or economics experiments is to sort
participants into minimal groups, either randomly or based on some arbitrary or trivial attribute. Many such studies find that participants act more
favorably toward in-group members even when there is no rational reason
to do so. In one study, participants allocated more money to in-group members than out-group members and were more likely to reward and less likely
to punish in-group members than out-group members.47 Another study
found that participants were more trusting of in-group members than of
out-group members and were more trustworthy when dealing with in-group
members.48 The mere fact of group identification can make people not only
more generous to in-group members but also more trusting and more willing to reciprocate favorably.49 These effects also occur in experiments using
real-world, randomly constituted groups.50 In one study, participants in the
47

Yan Chen and Sherry Xin Li, “Group Identity and Social Preferences,” American Economic
Review 99 (March 2009): 431–57.
48
Shaun P. Hargreaves Heap and Daniel John Zizzo, “The Value of Groups,” American
Economic Review 99 (March 2009): 295–323.
49
These group effects are also correlated with the salience of group membership to participants. See Gary Charness, Luca Rigotti, and Aldo Rustichini, “Individual Behavior and
Group Membership,” American Economic Review 97 (September 2007): 1340–52.
50
Random assignment to groups is valuable because it isolates the effect of group membership
from the effects of other characteristics that members of a group may share.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

82

James Kwak

Joint Officer Training Program of the Swiss military were more trusting of
and trustworthy to members of their own platoons than to members of
other platoons.51
Group identification also induces people to conform to their expectations for the groups with which they identify. According to Akerlof and
Kranton,52 a person derives utility from her identity. That utility is a function of the social status of the group she identifies with, her similarity to
the ideal type of that group, and the degree of conformity between her (and
others’) actions and her expectations of that group. For example, workers’
effort depends on whether they identify as company insiders or as outsiders,
not solely on their individual returns to effort, and, therefore, policies that
encourage identification as insiders increase effort.53 In some cases, people
are able to choose the group with which they identify, by implication to
maximize their utility.54 This may be a choice within a single dimension
such as gender (that is, identification as male or female is to some extent a
matter of choice), or it may be a choice among the different group identifications that are available at any moment (that is, an Asian woman may choose
to identify as Asian or as female in a given context). According to social
identity theory, a person is simultaneously a member of several groups,
and her thoughts and actions are influenced by the group affiliation that is
most salient in a given context.55 Experiments involving priming – by which
participants are surreptitiously reminded of some aspect of their identity –
show that behavior is even affected by unconscious selection among available identifications. For example, Asian-American female students’ performance on a math test differed based on whether they were primed with
their ethnic or their gender identity.56
51

Lorenz Goette, David Huffman, and Stephan Meier, “The Impact of Group Membership on
Cooperation and Norm Enforcement: Evidence Using Random Assignment to Real Social
Groups,” American Economic Review 96 (May 2006): 212–16. Donors are more likely to
find a charity worthy if it is represented as serving people of the donor’s race; see Christina
M. Fong and Erzo F.P. Luttmer, “Do Fairness and Race Matter in Generosity? Evidence
from a Nationally Representative Charity Experiment,” Journal of Public Economics 95,
no. 5–6 (June 2011): 372–94.
52
George A. Akerlof and Rachel E. Kranton, “Economics and Identity,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 115 (August 2000): 719.
53
George A. Akerlof and Rechel E. Kranton, Identity Economics: How Our Identities Shape
Our Work, Wages and Well-Being (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2010).
54
Akerlof and Kranton, “Economics and Identity,” 719–20.
55
Akerlof and Kranton, “Economics and Identity,” 731 n. 30.
56
Margaret Shih, Todd L. Pittinsky, and Nalini Ambady, “Stereotype Susceptibility: Identity
Salience and Shifts in Quantitative Performance,” Psychological Science 10 (January 1999):
80–3.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

83

Key questions in the regulatory context, then, are what factors affect a
regulator’s choice of group identification and what that choice implies for
policy. Two different types of identifications are relevant here. First, in a
contest between two interest groups – say, credit card issuers and credit card
customers – a regulator might identify with one group and not the other; the
specific identification could be with the interest group itself (bankers or consumers) or with that group’s representatives (bank lobbyists or consumer
advocates). Although this may be unlikely to produce conscious favoritism,
the regulator will be more inclined to trust the side with which she identifies more, which can affect her policy choices. Second, a regulator’s actions
might be influenced by her conception of her own role as a civil servant.
Someone who identifies as an economically sophisticated steward of efficient financial markets will adopt different policy positions than someone
who identifies as a defender of the “little guy” against large, faceless corporations, even if both share the ultimate objective of increasing the economic
welfare of ordinary people. The steward of efficient markets would be more
open to the argument that classifying late fees as interest would lower the
overall cost of credit because it is more consistent with her self-conception –
in Akerlof and Kranton’s terms, she would gain greater utility from identity.
In the context of financial regulation, both of these effects appear more
likely to favor regulated industry. On any significant issue, all interested parties are likely to send well-educated, articulate, well-dressed representatives
to meet with agency officials. When it comes to financial regulation, however, industry has the advantage of the revolving door. From 2009 to mid2010, for example, 148 former employees of financial regulatory agencies
registered as lobbyists.57 In this chapter, I do not consider the implications
of the revolving door for regulators’ material self-interest. However, the normalcy of moving from an administrative agency to the financial sector and
the sheer number of people making the transition imply that the regulators
and the representatives of financial institutions are really the same people,
only at different points in their careers. Regulators are more likely to have
personal connections with industry lobbyists or to envision themselves in
their shoes. This may not directly affect their ideological sympathies or their
assessment of the merits of an issue, but it could easily affect their identification – which side they consciously or unconsciously perceive as their
in-group. And this will affect the degree to which they trust information or
opinions provided by the financial sector.
57

Eric Lichtblau, “Ex-Regulators Get Set to Lobby on New Financial Rules,” New York Times,
July 27, 2010. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/28/business/28lobby.html.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

84

James Kwak

The other industry advantage is that, until recently, few people came to
Washington to protect ordinary people from banks. Before the recent financial crisis, banks faced four major federal regulators: the Federal Reserve,
primarily responsible for stable economic growth and low inflation; the
FDIC, responsible for the solvency of its insurance fund; and the OCC and
the OTS, primarily responsible for the safety and soundness of banks and
thrifts, respectively. Before the creation of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) in the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010, no agency had the
primary mandate of protecting consumers. Instead, the dominant theory
was that consumers’ interests would be best protected by free market competition. Because people rarely became bank regulators to protect consumers,
it was more likely that regulators thought of themselves as stewards of an
efficient financial system or, more simply, identified with the bankers. This
attitude was on display in 2010 when members of the CFPB implementation team arrived for an on-site visit to a major financial institution. As
people were meeting each other, a company executive who had flown in
from another office introduced himself to someone he thought was from
the CFPB. “No, I’m one of you,” the person corrected him. “I’m from the
[bank regulatory agency].”58
For both of these reasons, financial regulators tended to identify with
the financial institutions that they regulated.59 This perhaps contrasts with
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which is often cited as an
agency that is not captured by the industries that it regulates60 (and is
sometimes criticized for being captured by environmental groups61 ). As
Rachlinski and Farina62 say, “Those who seek work at an agency charged
with responsibility for the environment probably have strong views about
the appropriate goals and means of environmental regulation.” Their
identity carries the expectation that they will protect the environment

58

For large financial institutions, the primary regulator typically locates a group of agency
employees on site – hence the identification with the institution itself and not with the
outsiders from Washington.
59
For example, discussing Eliot Spitzer’s prominence in investigating financial industry scandals, Jonathan Macey wrote, “The SEC was fully acclimated to existing market practices
and saw no urgent need to change them. The SEC staff identified with the market participants they were ostensibly regulating.” Jonathan R. Macey, “State-Federal Relations
Post-Eliot Spitzer,” Brooklyn Law Review 70 (2004): 128.
60
See Croley, “Public Interested Regulation,” 55–66.
61
For a summary and rebuttal of this criticism, see Bagley and Revesz, “Centralized Oversight
of the Regulatory State,” 1285–90.
62
Rachlinski and Farina, “Cognitive Psychology and Optimal Government Design,” 579–
80.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

85

(from, say, industrial companies), and that expectation conditions their
actions.63

Status
Like group identification, status can have significant effects on behavior. On
issues in which expertise is recognized to be important, laypeople tend to
defer to people with specific status characteristics (e.g., a relevant advanced
degree), which may seem reasonable. However, status can influence behavior
in other ways not predicted by the rational actor model. Diffuse status
characteristics, based on stereotypes rather than relevant qualifications,
affect beliefs about social categories and thereby affect relationships between
people.64 As a result, people behave more favorably toward other people of
high status. In addition, they are more likely to learn from or imitate people
of high status, in part because they want to claim status themselves.
As with group identification, status can confer benefits even when it
is assigned arbitrarily or based on seemingly irrelevant criteria. In one
experiment, after people were classified as “stars” or “no-stars” based on
their performance on a trivia quiz, stars were offered more money in an
ultimatum game than no-stars.65 In other experiments, high-status players
obtained better market outcomes than low-status players, even when status
assignment was transparently random.66 Similar results are produced by
preexisting indicators of social status. One study found that college students
with higher social status received more money back in a trust game than
students with lower status.67 The common theme is that people behave
63

Bagley and Revesz (p. 1301), however, argued that agency bureaucrats are motivated less
by ideology and more by “career advancement, producing a quality work product, and
abiding by professional and ethical norms.”
64
Catherine C. Eckel, Enrique Fatas, and Rick Wilson, “Cooperation and Status in Organizations,” Journal of Public Economic Theory 12, no. 4 (2010): 740; Cecilia L. Ridgeway and
Kristan Glasgow Erickson, “Creating and Spreading Status Beliefs,” American Journal of
Sociology 106 (November 2000): 580.
65
Sheryl Ball and Catherine C. Eckel, “The Economic Value of Status,” Journal of SocioEconomics 27, no. 4 (1998): 503–7. Participants thought that status was assigned based on
the quiz, but the actual assignment was effectively random. It is theoretically possible that
participants believed that people who are good at trivia quizzes either deserve more money
or are more likely to reject low offers, but this would only demonstrate the tendency of
status distinctions in one realm to affect behavior in generally unrelated realms.
66
Ball and Eckel, “The Economic Value of Status,” 507–10; Sheryl Ball, Catherine Eckel, Philip
J. Grossman, and William Zame, “Status in Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116
(February 2001): 161–88.
67
Edward L. Glaeser, David I. Laibson, José A. Scheinkman, and Christine L. Soutter,
“Measuring Trust,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (August 2000): 836–40.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

86

James Kwak

more favorably toward people with high status even in contexts in which
there is no obvious payoff from doing so. This happens in the real world
as well, for example, when three star football players capitalized on their
celebrity to raise money for their hedge funds – which then collapsed during
the financial crisis.68
People are not only nicer to high-status people; they also are more likely
to adopt their ideas and behaviors, even when not warranted by the source of
their status.69 In one culture, for example, “great turtle hunters are permitted
to speak and are listened to more than others, despite the fact that their
skill in hunting turtles gives no direct indication of their skill in public
affairs or politics.”70 The influence of status is especially important in areas
where it is difficult for individuals to learn on their own.71 Anecdotally,
it appears that a major charitable contribution by a high-status donor
will lead to follow-on gifts by other donors.72 Kumru and Vesterlund73
confirmed experimentally that low-status participants are more likely to
mimic high-status participants who donate first, whereas the converse is
less likely to occur.74 In another repeated-game experiment, participants
were more likely to respond to a signal from a high-status than from a
low-status counterparty.75
There are two plausible explanations for this behavior. One is deference to
people with high status: we interpret their behavior as a command to behave
accordingly, whether that means conceding in a negotiation or contributing
to the same charity. Alternatively, we may want to obtain higher status
or confirm our belief that we have that higher status. For Akerlof and
Kranton,76 higher status can provide utility directly. Empirically, we know
68

Edward Robinson, “Winning Super Bowl Lets Montana Teammates Fumble Elite Investing,” Bloomberg Markets Magazine, February 9, 2011. Available at http://www.bloomberg
.com/news/2011–02–02/winning-super-bowls-lets-montana-teammates-fumblehandling-elite-investor.html.
69
Joseph Henrich and Francisco J. Gil-White, “The Evolution of Prestige: Freely Conferred
Deference as a Mechanism for Enhancing the Benefits of Cultural Transmission,” Evolution and Human Behavior 22 (2001): 184–6.
70
Ibid., 184.
71
Ibid., 185.
72
Cagri S. Kumru and Lise Vesterlund, “The Effect of Status on Charitable Giving,” Journal
of Public Economic Theory 12 (August 2010): 709–35.
73
Ibid.
74
See also Eckel, Fatas, and Wilson, “Cooperation and Status in Organizations,” who found
that participants in a voluntary contribution game are more likely to imitate a high-status
player and are more responsive to punishment by a high-status player.
75
Catherine C. Eckel and Rick K. Wilson, “Social Learning in Coordination Games: Does
Status Matter?” Experimental Economics 10 (2007): 317–29.
76
Akerlof and Kranton, “Economics and Identity,” 719.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

87

that people value status and will expend resources to gain it, even when
it provides no material advantage. In one experiment, when output was
publicly visible, people paid money to increase their own output or to
reduce other participants’ output even though it had no impact on their
individual payoffs.77 In another case, participants were willing to overinvest
in seeking status, even though this reduced their expected payoffs.78
In the real world, where status is not determined in an experiment, we
pursue status through signaling behaviors. According to social comparison
theory, we can improve our self-image by emphasizing similarities with and
connections to higher status people.79 We like to behave in ways that are consistent with our idealized images of ourselves,80 and so we adopt behaviors
that we think are typical of high-status people. One example is conspicuous
consumption, identified by Thorstein Veblen, but material wealth is only
one indicator of status. According to Bourdieu,81 cultural judgments are
another means of establishing social prestige, with the advantage that taste
cannot simply be bought and therefore serves as a lasting marker of class
differentiation: “Social subjects . . . distinguish themselves by the distinctions they make, between the beautiful and the ugly, the distinguished and
the vulgar.” In addition to pursuing status through consumption choices,
people pursue status through cultural and intellectual choices.
In practice, status differentiations exist along many different dimensions.
We look up to actors, athletes, firefighters, and hedge fund billionaires
for different reasons. Several of these dimensions provide an advantage to
financial institutions in the regulatory context. First, insofar as wealth and
business success are sources of status, the financial sector has them in spades.
Financial regulators living in Washington and New York saw firsthand the
vast sums of money being made by Wall Street bankers and traders. In addition, with brief exceptions for the analyst and accounting scandals around
2001–2002, the financial sector was routinely lionized as both an exemplar
of the knowledge economy and an engine of economic growth. Financial
77

Gary Charness, David Masclet, and Marie-Claire Villeval, “Competitive Preferences and
Status as an Incentive: Experimental Evidence,” Working Paper 1016, Group d’Analyse et
de Théorie Économique Lyon-St. Étienne, June 2010.
78
Bernardo A. Huberman, Christoph H. Loch, and Ayse Önçuler, “Status as a Valued
Resource,” Social Psychology Quarterly 67 (2004): 103–14.
79
Jerry Suls, René Martin, and Ladd Wheeler, “Social Comparison: Why, With Whom, and
With What Effect?” Current Directions in Psychological Science 11 (October 2002): 159–
63.
80
Roy F. Baumeister, “A Self-Presentational View of Social Phenomena,” Psychological Bulletin 91, no. 1 (1982): 3.
81
Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste, Translated by
Richard Nice (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984), 6.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

88

James Kwak

institutions and their captains also bought status through charitable work
and contributions. For example, Sanford Weill, the creator of Citigroup,
has donated several hundred million dollars to Cornell University (which
named its medical school after him) and is chair of the board of Carnegie
Hall.82
Second, finance itself became glamorous, thanks in part to its portrayal
in major cultural works, beginning in the late 1980s with The Bonfire of
the Vanities, Wall Street, and Liar’s Poker. Despite the ambivalent light these
works cast on modern finance, they popularized the image of the swashbuckling, individualistic, and very rich “master of the universe.” For agency
employees who never had a chance to become Hollywood stars or professional athletes, the banking lifestyle was perhaps the most glamorous one
in their sphere of potential experience. At its peak, it seemed like finance
was the most desirable job in the world, with financial institutions claiming 40 percent of the Princeton seniors who went to work directly after
graduation.83 The Wall Street recruiting machine, with its constant assertions that finance attracted the best and the brightest,84 also ensured that
anyone who went to a top college, business school, or law school was well
aware of the prestige of banking. Insofar as status can exert any pull on
regulators, then, the major financial institutions were likely to benefit from
that pull.
Third, as the world of finance became more technical, its academic pedigree became more imposing. By the 1990s, financial economics was a branch
of applied mathematics, and several of its leading figures were advocates of
efficient markets and financial innovation, including multiple winners of
the Nobel Prize in Economics. On an issue such as the use of value-at-risk
statistical models for calculating capital requirements, regulators who might
not understand the math had to choose between an old theory of the world
that everyone knew was wrong (e.g., that all mortgages were exactly half as
risky as all commercial loans85 ) and a new theory that, although not practically tested, was supported by famous economists. Academic endorsement
may be a valid proxy for the correctness of a theory. However, subscribing
82

“Slate 60: Donor Bios,” Slate, February 5, 2010. Steven Schwarzman, founder of Blackstone,
has contributed $100 million to the New York Public Library (whose main building
is named after him) and is chair of the board of the John F. Kennedy Center for the
Performing Arts. “Slate 60: Donor Bios,” Slate, January 23, 2009.
83
Cailey Hall, “Wall Street: Paradise Found?” Daily Princetonian, September 29, 2005. Available at http://www.dailyprincetonian.com/2005/09/29/13254/.
84
Karen Ho, Liquidated: An Ethnography of Wall Street (Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
2009), 42–55.
85
These were rules mandated by the Basel I Accord for calculating capital requirements.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

89

to cutting-edge financial theories also provided perceived status benefits.
These factors all enhanced the status of the financial sector, which could
give financial regulators additional motivation to adopt its worldview and
policy positions.

Relationships
On March 8, 2010, I attended a “blogger briefing” at the Treasury
Department with Secretary Timothy Geithner and several other senior
officials. Waldman said the following about a similar meeting the previous
November:
Most corrupt acts don’t take the form of clearly immoral choices. People fight those.
Corruption thrives where there is a tension between institutional and interpersonal
ethics. There is “the right thing” in abstract, but there are also very human impulses
towards empathy, kindness, and reciprocity that result from relationships with flesh
and blood people. . . . I was flattered and grateful for the meeting and left with more
sympathy for the people I spoke to than I came in with. In other words, I have been
corrupted, a little.86

(Note that Treasury did not pay the expenses of meeting attendees, whose
only material benefit was cookies.)87 This is the familiar effect of relationships: you are more favorably disposed toward someone you have shared
cookies with, or at least it is harder for you to take some action that harms
his or her interests. Relationships matter because we care about what other
people think of us, in particular those people with whom we come into
contact regularly. Relationship pressure is magnified both by visibility –
the degree to which one party can observe the other’s actions – and by the
frequency with which people interact.
These familiar observations are borne out by research in psychology and
economics. Because we care about what other people think about us, we
engage in “self-presentation” that, according to Baumeister,88 “is aimed
at establishing, maintaining, or refining an image of the individual in the
minds of others.” One consequence is that “people conform more readily to
the opinions and expectations of others when these others are watching than
86

Steve Randy Waldman, “Sympathy for the Treasury,” Interfluidity, November 5, 2009.
Available at http://www.interfluidity.com/posts/1257407150.shtml.
87
Cookies are no joking matter. In December 2010, as the Federal Communications Commission was setting rules for managing Internet traffic, AT&T sent the agency 1,530
cupcakes from Georgetown Cupcake. Edward Wyatt, “Arsenal of a Lobbyist: Hardball and
Cupcakes,” New York Times, March 26, 2011. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2011/
03/27/business/27phone.html.
88
Baumeister, “A Self-Presentational View of Social Phenomena,” 3.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

90

James Kwak

when they are not”; deindividuation, where people’s actions are not individually identifiable, has the effect of reducing conformity.89 The importance
of self-presentation has been borne out in economics experiments. In a trust
game, participants were less likely to cooperate when their counterparties
could not see their behavior and less likely to cooperate when it was not clear
who was matched with whom.90 Because participant pairs were randomly
shuffled (and often anonymous), it is likely that people were motivated by
what others thought about them and not by the material benefits of establishing a reputation.91 In another experiment, players in two-person games
behaved more aggressively before an audience of in-group members and
more deferentially before an audience of out-group members.92
Similar behavior has been identified in the real world. A study of supermarket cashiers found that an individual cashier’s productivity depended
on the productivity of the cashiers immediately behind her – but not if her
shifts had little overlap with theirs.93 By implication, the individual cashier
was motivated by what the people behind her (who could watch her working) thought about her, but only if she was likely to interact with them often
in the future. As another example, when college students played a trust
game, the amount that recipients returned to senders depended in part on
the degree of social connection between them.94
In the regulatory context, relationship effects can be difficult to disentangle from revolving door effects. Traditional capture theory holds
that regulators have a rational interest in doing favors for firms that
can provide them future employment options. However, even an agency
employee who is uninterested in higher paying private sector jobs is not
immune to relationship pressures. In what Meidinger95 called a “regulatory
community,” “members of the community frequently influence each other,
act with reference to each other, and desire each other’s respect.” Or as Ayres
and Braithwaite96 put it, “One of the most plausible noneconomic theories
89

Ibid., 8.
Steven Tadelis, “The Power of Shame and the Rationality of Trust,” Working Paper, March
2, 2011.
91
Tadelis, “The Power of Shame and the Rationality of Trust,” 14–15.
92
Charness, Rigotti, and Rustichini, “Individual Behavior and Group Membership.”
93
Alexandre Mas and Enrico Moretti, “Peers at Work,” American Economic Review 99 (March
2009): 112–45.
94
Glaeser et al., “Measuring Trust,” 834–86.
95
Errol Meidinger, “Regulatory Culture: A Theoretical Outline,” Law & Policy 9 (October
1987): 365.
96
Ian Ayres and John Braithwaite, “Tripartism: Regulatory Capture and Empowerment,”
Law & Social Inquiry 16 (Summer 1991): 471.
90

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

91

of capture is the most mundane: regulators like to cooperate with firms
because they seek a conflict-free work life.”97
In principle, there is no reason why relationship pressures would necessarily favor one interest group over another, because administrative actions
are equally visible to all sides (at least in theory), and regulatory policy is a
repeat game in which the issues may change but the parties often remain the
same. In practice, however, there are two reasons why relationship pressure
is likely to favor regulated industry, at least in the case of financial regulation. First, for reasons discussed previously, financial regulators are likely to
share more social networks with financial institutions and their lawyers and
lobbyists than with competing interest groups such as consumers. Although
group identification and relationship pressure are two conceptually distinct
channels of influence, they are likely to occur in overlapping circumstances.
The revolving door between government and industry, by creating social
connections between people on opposite sides of the door, therefore has an
influence even on people who are personally impervious to its attractions.98
Similarly, Minerals Management Service (MMS) employees working in
Lake Charles, Louisiana, shared social networks with industry personnel; as
Carrigan notes in this volume (see Chapter 10), one MMS employee said,
“Almost all of our inspectors have worked for oil companies out on these
same platforms. They grew up in the same towns. . . . Some of these people,
they’ve been friends with all their life.”
Second, the importance of relationships exacerbates the collective action
problem often identified as a cause of regulatory capture. According to
the traditional account, small interest groups (in the sense that they have a
small number of members, not that they are small economically) with a deep
interest in the issue at hand are better able to coordinate their activities and
buy favorable policy than large groups with diffuse interests; the former are
typified by regulated industry, the latter by the public at large.99 Croley100 has
criticized the collective action account for, among other things, assuming
that politicians will necessarily be more responsive to small, well-financed
97

Similarly, daily contact with agency staff can influence the positions held by agency heads,
as described by Livermore and Revesz in this volume (see Chapter 15), reducing the
potential impact of new political appointees on agency policies.
98
One potential consequence, according to Baxter, is “a cognitive bias in which different views are not even perceived, let alone recognized and properly analyzed.” Baxter,
“Capture in Financial Regulation.”
99
See George J. Stigler, “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics
and Management Science 2 (Spring 1971): 10–13; Croley, “Public Interested Regulation,”
13–15.
100
Croley, “Public Interested Regulation,” 18–21.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

92

James Kwak

interest groups than to broad-based interest groups that represent large
numbers of voters. However, even if broad-based groups can command
attention at election time or when issues gain significant public attention,
they are still likely to lack the organizational infrastructure and staying power
to knock on regulators’ doors month in, month out, on issue after issue.
For example, the congressional debate over financial regulatory reform
in 2009–2010 attracted widespread media attention and the participation of
broad-based, pro-reform groups such as Americans for Financial Reform
(AFR), a coalition of hundreds of progressive organizations.101 By contrast, when regulatory reform moved to the agencies for implementation,
although AFR did not close up shop, representatives of financial institutions
and large nonfinancial companies were much better able to fill the halls of
the agencies. Early in 2011, CFTC chair Gary Gensler said, “Large institutions have a great deal more resources than the investor advocates. If you
looked at those 475 meetings [in the past five months] . . . 90-plus percent
are probably larger institutions or corporations.”102 In this case, industry
representatives are better situated to build the long-term relationships that
can shade regulators’ perceptions of people and of the merits of policy issues.
Similar distinctions can also occur within a single industry. For example,
the Offshore Energy division of MMS chose to focus its attention on small,
independent developers rather than the major energy companies in part
because it was more familiar with the latter (see Chapter 10). Again, this
apparent advantage for regulated industry might be contrasted with other
regulatory domains such as certain types of environmental policy, in which
major environmental organizations may occupy a more symmetric position
to industry.
Regulators, like all human beings,103 are susceptible to other cognitive
biases beyond those discussed here, and this is not an exhaustive list of the
ways in which interest groups can influence the process by which regulators
101

This is an example of how “[t]he financial crisis and the national debate over financial
regulation opened a social aperture in the realm of finance policy making.” Daniel
Carpenter, “The Contest of Lobbies and Disciplines: Financial Politics and Regulatory
Reform in the Obama Administration,” in Lawrence Jacobs and Theda Skocpol, eds.,
Reaching for a New Deal: President Obama’s Agenda and the Dynamics of U.S. Politics
(Russell Sage Foundation, 2011).
102
Ben Protess and Mac William Bishop, “At Center of Derivatives Debate, a Gung-Ho Regulator,” DealBook, The New York Times, February 10, 2011. Available at http://dealbook
.nytimes.com/2011/02/10/at-center-of-debate-over-derivatives-a-gung-ho-regulator/.
103
Or, at least, like most well-educated Americans. See Joseph Henrich, Steven J. Heine, and
Ara Norenzayan, “The Weirdest People in the World?” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33
(2010): 61–135.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

93

form their beliefs and preferences.104 The well-known set of cognitive limitations identified by behavioral psychology can provide inspiration for countless other lobbying tactics. Information capture as discussed by Wagner105
works in part because human beings have limited processing capacity and
therefore resort to useful but potentially misleading heuristics when dealing
with large volumes of information. Filling up regulators’ meeting schedules
also affects regulators’ ability to evaluate competing perspectives objectively. In general, the more complex and information-intensive an issue is
and the less capacity the agency has to devote to the issue, the greater the
potential importance of cultural capture. Faced with uncertainty deciding
between competing theories of the world and the public interest, people are
more likely to fall back on the signals communicated by identity, status, or
relationships.
IMPLICATIONS

In the two decades leading up to the 2007–2009 financial crisis, the banking
industry achieved the practical equivalent of capture, with federal regulatory
agencies generally adopting its favored positions. Although several signs
of traditional capture were present – notably a well-oiled revolving door
between regulatory agencies and industry – the argument for capture in
the strict sense is weakened by a plausible alternative explanation: that
agency officials were genuinely persuaded by the argument that free financial
markets were good for the public. In this light, the important question
is why theories of the world that are wrong or at least widely contested
gain broad acceptance in a specific community – here, the community of
financial regulatory agencies. Where the underlying theories require highly
specialized expertise (e.g., advanced degrees in financial economics) and
are empirically contested, it would be naı̈ve to expect policy debates to
turn solely on the intellectual merits of the parties’ positions. Cultural
capture provides an alternative explanation of how policy is formed – neither
through simple corruption nor through purely rational debate, but through
the soft pressures that arise from the specific characteristics of the regulatory
community.
104

Rachlinski and Farina (“Cognitive Psychology and Optimal Government Design”) discussed the general implications of several well-known cognitive biases for policymakers.
Kuran and Sunstein discussed specific measures that could help executive agencies resist
“availability cascades.” Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, “Availability Cascades and
Risk Regulation,” Stanford Law Review 51 (April 1999): 754–8.
105
Wagner, “Administrative Law, Filter Failure, and Information Capture.”

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

94

James Kwak

Cultural capture need not operate alone, but can complement either
a public interest theory of regulation or a materialist capture theory of
regulation. On the one hand, the mechanisms of cultural capture can play
an instrumental role in helping financial institutions convince regulators of
the merits of their policy positions. Forced to evaluate opposing arguments
that are difficult to compare and often based on incommensurate policy
objectives (e.g., maximizing economic growth versus minimizing personal
bankruptcies), regulators are more likely to resort to proxies such as their
degree of trust in the people making those arguments or their academic
pedigree. That reliance on proxies can be either conscious or unconscious
and is shaped by regulators’ susceptibility to the influences of identity,
status, and relationships. On the other hand, cultural capture can also
make it easier for regulators to pursue their material self-interest. Most
regulators probably do not see themselves as trading influence for material
gain. Instead, cultural capture provides additional motivations to adopt
industry-friendly positions that are likely to be in their long-term material
self-interest. According to the theory of cognitive dissonance, people choose
their preferences or beliefs to make them consistent with their actions.106
If a regulator sees her job as protecting ordinary people and believes that
financial institutions harm consumers, then siding with industry will
create psychological tension; if instead she believes that free markets are
good for ordinary people, she will be able to adopt industry-friendly (and
self-interest–maximizing) positions without suffering cognitive dissonance.
This is not to say that culture capture was the sole or primary reason for the
dominance of deregulatory ideas in Washington during the past two decades.
Modern academic finance, at least in its more popular interpretations,
appeared to justify the ideology of free financial markets; that ideology also
received the enthusiastic support of conservative think tanks and media
outlets eager to make the case against government regulation in any form.
Old-fashioned electoral politics gave deregulatory presidents, beginning
with Ronald Reagan, the opportunity to appoint officials who explicitly
favored relaxing constraints on financial institutions long before they arrived
in Washington. Well-funded, plausibly rational ideas can certainly go a long
way in shaping the policy beliefs of agency staffers, especially when they are
championed by political appointees. However, cultural capture is likely to
have lent a helping hand.
106

See George A. Akerlof and William T. Dickens, “The Economic Consequences of Cognitive
Dissonance,” American Economic Review 72 (June 1982): 307–19.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

95

Cultural capture is not a complete explanation of financial regulators’
behavior in the run-up to the financial crisis for another reason: the mechanisms that produce cultural capture are basic features of human interactions
and therefore predate the recent cycle of financial deregulation. Although
the potential for cultural capture may be a constant, there are several reasons
why its effects may have been more powerful in recent years. Rapid innovation in the financial sector pushed regulators to make decisions regarding
new activities such as complex derivatives where neither existing statutes nor
previous regulatory actions provided much guidance; the increasing complexity of finance made it more difficult for agency employees to evaluate
proposals on their merits, increasing the importance of proxies; the growth
in lobbying expenditures beginning in the 1970s exacerbated the asymmetry
of influence between the financial industry and competing interest groups;
and the rapid growth of financial industry compensation unmistakably
widened the status gap between major banks and federal agencies. Together,
these factors made cultural capture an increasingly important reason why
regulators might be swayed in favor of industry positions.
This chapter has discussed cultural capture in the context of financial
regulation. In general, however, some factors that should make cultural
capture a particularly important channel of industry influence are a high
degree of similarity between industry representatives and regulators; an
industry with a notable social purpose with which regulators can identify;
an industry with high social, cultural, or intellectual status; many social connections between industry and regulators; and technically complex issues,
for which it is not clear how the benefits of policy alternatives are shared. To
some extent, these same factors can also contribute to traditional capture
based on material self-interest. If we think of material capture and cultural
capture as alternative strategies for industry, then a major determinant of
the importance of cultural capture might simply be the availability of material capture as an option. If bribes are legal, they are the simplest and surest
way of achieving the desired outcome; insofar as bribes and their cousins
become illegal, difficult, or subject to public scrutiny, then cultural capture
will become more important.
The final question to ask about cultural capture is what we should do
about it. In this context, it is important to remember that cultural capture is
the unavoidable byproduct of necessary interactions between human beings.
It is not feasible and probably not desirable to strip all interactions between
regulated industry and regulatory agencies of their human elements. The
close relationships and repeat interactions that help make cultural capture possible may also promote socially beneficial information sharing and

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

96

James Kwak

cooperation.107 Indeed, as McCarty shows in this volume (see Chapter 5), an
agency’s ability to gain useful information from firm behavior can depend
on the proximity between its preferences and firm preferences. Countering
cultural capture may also be particularly difficult: for example, how do you
prevent regulators from being influenced by the desire to maintain decent
social relationships with repeat players?
However, several policies designed to protect against traditional capture
could potentially limit the importance of cultural capture: by weakening the
underlying mechanisms of influence, by reducing the imbalance between
regulated industry and other interest groups, or by raising the scientific or
evidentiary standards for agency decision making. Tightening restrictions
on the revolving door – for example, extending the period of time during
which ex-regulators are prohibited from lobbying their former agencies –
could attenuate the bonds of identification that link regulator and regulated.
In the case of the recent financial crisis, criminal prosecution of bankers
or their institutions (where warranted by the facts, of course) could go
some way toward reducing the prestige of the financial sector. On balance,
however, the mechanisms of cultural capture are likely to continue to favor
financial institutions over competing interest groups such as consumer
advocates.
Negotiated rulemaking, in which competing interest groups are invited
to the agency’s table to negotiate proposed rules, could reduce cultural
capture by helping to equalize the influence of different interest groups
and making relationships more explicit and less informal.108 A conceptually related approach is tripartism, in which a nongovernment organization (NGO) is given full access to the regulatory process and standing to
enforce violations after the fact; competition between NGOs should limit
the risk of capture.109 Another possibility is the appointment of an official public advocate to represent the public interest or consumers’ interests
107

See Errol Meidinger, “Regulatory Culture: A Theoretical Outline,” Law & Policy 9 (October 1987): 366. A similar dynamic may exist in corporate boards of directors, where
collegiality can produce higher productivity and performance but where social ties can
lead some members to “develop a sense of ‘in-group’ bias that colors how they evaluate
claims by others . . . that threaten one or more group members.” Donald C. Langevoort,
“The Human Nature of Corporate Boards: Law, Norms, and the Unintended Consequences of Independence and Accountability,” Georgetown Law Journal 89 (April 2001):
810–11.
108
Negotiated Rulemaking Act of 1990, codified at 5 U.S.C. §§ 561–570. For an overview of
negotiated rulemaking and some critiques, see Jody Freeman, “Collaborative Governance
in the Administrative State,” UCLA Law Review 45 (October 1997): 33–40.
109
Ayres and Braithwaite, “Tripartism: Regulatory Capture and Empowerment.” On tripartism and financial regulation, see also Baxter, “Capture in Financial Regulation.”

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

Cultural Capture and the Financial Crisis

97

in agency proceedings.110 Schwarcz in this volume (see Chapter 13) discusses the strengths and weaknesses of similar consumer empowerment
programs in insurance regulation. In each of these cases, one goal is to provide a counterbalance to industry power and influence, whether material or
cultural.
Another general approach to the problem of cultural capture is to create
an external check on the information and analysis used to justify agency
actions. One possible source of external review is the Office of Information
and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA), which has issued guidelines governing data
quality and the use of peer review by administrative agencies; Bagley and
Revesz111 regard “OIRA’s standardization of agency science as a salutary
development for the regulatory state,” but argue that it could go further.
OIRA’s generalist scope and its role in harmonizing regulations among
affected agencies, discussed by Livermore and Revesz in this volume (see
Chapter 15), could also ensure that an agency’s actions are reviewed by people with different group identifications and relationship networks. Another
example is provided by the advisory boards convened by some agencies to
review the data and methodologies that they use. Although OIRA enforcement could help reduce agencies’ dependence on “bad science,” the external
academic community might do a better job of ensuring that agencies consider a diversity of relevant opinion and research. In the financial context,
this might have meant paying more attention to research by people such as
Robert Shiller showing that markets are not always efficient and housing
bubbles can occur.112 However, it would be unrealistic to expect academic
criticism alone to solve the problem of cultural capture. In 2005, Raghuram Rajan, one of the world’s leading finance scholars, chose the Federal
Reserve’s main policy conference to argue that financial liberalization was
making the global financial system less rather than more stable. He was
strongly criticized, both by Fed Vice Chair Donald Kohn and by former
Treasury Secretary Larry Summers, and Federal Reserve policy did not
budge.113 And, of course, academics can also be captured, as shown by
Zingales in this volume (see Chapter 6).
110

Rachel E. Barkow, “Insulating Agencies: Avoiding Capture Through Regulatory Design,”
Texas Law Review 89 (November 2010): 62–4.
111
Bagley and Revesz, “Centralized Oversight of the Regulatory State,” 1316.
112
For an overview of empirical attacks on the efficient markets hypothesis, see Justin Fox,
The Myth of the Rational Market: A History of Risk, Reward, and Delusion on Wall Street
(New York: Harper Business, 2009), 191–210.
113
Justin Lahart, “Mr. Rajan Was Unpopular (But Prescient) at Greenspan Party.”
Wall Street Journal, January 2, 2009. Available at http://online.wsj.com/article/SB
123086154114948151.html.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

98

James Kwak

Because cultural capture takes advantage of unconscious biases that regulators become subject to, another approach is to attempt to “debias” those
regulators through procedures or substantive rules designed to counteract
those biases.114 A common debiasing strategy is to encourage or force people
to consider disconfirming information or counterarguments.115 One way
to approach this goal could be through policies that explicitly increase the
set of backgrounds from which regulators are drawn, thereby requiring a
diversity of viewpoints.116 A more aggressive step could be institutionalizing independent “devil’s advocates” within agencies to represent contrarian
viewpoints; by forcing regulators to justify their positions using evidence
and reason, they could reduce the influence of unconscious biases and
reliance on illegitimate proxies.117
In the end, however, cultural capture may simply be harder than traditional capture to protect against. In the traditional capture model, a regulator who sides with one interest group out of self-interest would still accept a
better offer from another interest group. When groups or ideas attain prestige of their own, however, and when people identify with groups or adopt
ideas in part because of the status they confer, it is considerably harder for
those people to identify the sources of their choices. Those choices become
sticky and are not vulnerable either to a higher offer or to rational argument
about the public interest. And so, although cultural capture may be less
reliable than the traditional kind, it can also provide a long-term source of
advantage for regulated industries that are able to mobilize it.

114

See Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein, “Debiasing Through Law,” Journal of Legal
Studies 35 (January 2006): 201–2.
115
For example, forcing (experimental) plaintiffs and defendants to consider and list the
weaknesses in their respective cases eliminated self-serving bias on each side, making it
easier to reach settlement. Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Samuel Issacharoff,
“Creating Convergence: Debiasing Biased Litigants,” Law and Social Inquiry 22 (1997):
918–20.
116
Steven M. Davidoff, “The Government’s Elite and Regulatory Capture,” DealBook,
New York Times, June 11, 2010. Available at http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2010/06/11/
the-governments-elite-and-regulatory-capture/.
117
On regulatory devil’s advocates in general, see Brett McDonnell and Daniel Schwarcz,
“Regulatory Contrarians,” North Carolina Law Review 89 (2011): 1629–79. Similarly, Troy
Paredes has suggested that corporate boards should include a “chief naysayer” to counter
CEO overconfidence. Troy A. Paredes, “Too Much Pay, Too Much Deference: Behavioral
Corporate Finance, CEOs, and Corporate Governance,” Florida State University Law
Review 32 (Winter 2005): 740–7.

Cambridge University Press
Not for sale or distribution.

